
For mathematical purposes, it has sometimes been convenient to treat a
problem as if one body could act upon another without any physical
medium between them; but such a conception has no degree of rationality,
and I know of no one who believes in it as a fact. If this be granted,
then our philosophy agrees with our experience, and every body moves
because it is pushed, and the mechanical antecedent of every kind of
phenomenon is to be looked for in some adjacent body possessing
energy; that is, the ability to push or produce pressure.

It must not be forgotten that energy is not a simple factor, but is
always a product of two factors--a mass with a velocity, a mass with a
temperature, a quantity of electricity into a pressure, and so on. One
may sometimes meet the statement that matter and energy are the two
realities; both are spoken of as entities. It is much more philosophical
to speak of matter and motion, for in the absence of motion there is no
energy, and the energy varies with the amount of motion; and
furthermore, to understand any manifestation of energy one must inquire
what kind of motion is involved. This we do when we speak of mechanical
energy as the energy involved in a body having a translatory motion;
also, when we speak of heat as a vibratory, and of light as a wave
motion. To speak of energy without stating or implying these
distinctions, is to speak loosely and to keep far within the bounds of
actual knowledge. To speak thus of a body possessing energy, or
expending energy, is to imply that the body possesses some kind of
motion, and produces pressure upon another body because it has motion.
Tait and others have pointed out the fact, that what is called potential
energy must, in its nature, be kinetic. Tait says--"Now it is impossible
to conceive of a truly dormant form of energy, whose magnitude should
depend, in any way, upon the unit of time; and we are forced to conclude
that potential energy, like kinetic energy, depends (even if unexplained
or unimagined) upon motion." All this means that it is now too late to
stop with energy as a final factor in any phenomenon, that the _form of
motion_ which embodies the energy is the factor that determines _what_
happens, as distinguished from how _much_ happens. Here, then, are to be
found the distinctions which have heretofore been called forces; here
is embodied the proof that direct pressure of one body upon another is
what causes the latter to move, and that the direction of movement
depends on the point of application, with reference to the centre
of mass.

It is needful now to look at the other term in the product we call
energy, namely, the substance moving, sometimes called matter or mass.
It has been mentioned that the idea of a medium filling space was
present to Newton, but his gravitation problem did not require that he
should consider other factors than masses and distances. The law of
gravitation as considered by him was--Every particle of matter attracts
every other particle of matter with a stress which is proportional to
the product of their masses, and inversely to the squares of the
distance between them. Here we are concerned only with the statement
that every particle of matter attracts every other particle of matter.
Everything then that possesses gravitative attraction is matter in the
sense in which that term is used in this law. If there be any other
substance in the universe that is not thus subject to gravitation, then
it is improper to call it matter, otherwise the law should read, "Some
particles of matter attract," etc., which will never do.

We are now assured that there is something else in the universe which
has no gravitative property at all, namely, the ether. It was first
imagined in order to account for the phenomena of light, which was
observed to take about eight minutes to come from the sun to the earth.
Then Young applied the wave theory to the explanation of polarization
and other phenomena; and in 1851 Foucault proved experimentally that the
velocity of light was less in water than in air, as it should be if the
wave theory be true, and this has been considered a crucial experiment
which took away the last hope for the corpuscular theory, and
demonstrated the existence of the ether as a space-filling medium
capable of transmitting light-waves known to have a velocity of 186,000
miles per second. It was called the luminiferous ether, to distinguish
it from other ethers which had also been imagined, such as electric
ether for electrical phenomena, magnetic ether for magnetic phenomena,
and so on--as many ethers, in fact, as there were different kinds of
phenomena to be explained.

It was Faraday who put a stop to the invention of ethers, by suggesting
that the so-called luminiferous ether might be the one concerned in all
the different phenomena, and who pointed out that the arrangement of
iron filings about a magnet was indicative of the direction of the
stresses in the ether. This suggestion did not meet the approval of the
mathematical physicists of his day, for it necessitated the abandonment
of the conceptions they had worked with, as well as the terminology
which had been employed, and made it needful to reconstruct all their
work to make it intelligible--a labour which was the more distasteful as
it was forced upon them by one who, although expert enough in
experimentation, was not a mathematician, and who boasted that the most
complicated mathematical work he ever did was to turn the crank of a
calculating machine; who did all his work, formed his conclusions, and
then said--"The work is done; hand it over to the computers."

It has turned out that Faraday's mechanical conceptions were right.
Every one now knows of Maxwell's work, which was to start with Faraday's
conceptions as to magnetic phenomena, and follow them out to their
logical conclusions, applying them to molecules and the reactions of the
latter upon the ether. Thus he was led to conclude that light was an
electro-magnetic phenomenon; that is, that the waves which constitute
light, and the waves produced by changing magnetism were identical in
their nature, were in the same medium, travelled with the same velocity,
were capable of refraction, and so on. Now that all this is a matter of
common knowledge to-day, it is curious to look back no further than ten
years. Maxwell's conclusions were adopted by scarcely a physicist in
the world. Although it was known that inductive action travelled with
finite velocity in space, and that an electro-magnet would affect the
space about it practically inversely as the square of the distance, and
that such phenomena as are involved in telephonic induction between
circuits could have no other meaning than the one assigned by Maxwell,
yet nearly all the physicists failed to form the only conception of it
that was possible, and waited for Hertz to devise apparatus for
producing interference before they grasped it. It was even then so new,
to some, that it was proclaimed to be a demonstration of the existence
of the ether itself, as well as a method of producing waves short enough
to enable one to notice interference phenomena. It is obvious that Hertz
himself must have had the mechanics of wave-motion plainly in mind, or
he would not have planned such experiments. The outcome of it all is,
that we now have experimental demonstration, as well as theoretical
reason for believing, that the ether, once considered as only
luminiferous, is concerned in all electric and magnetic phenomena, and
that waves set up in it by electro-magnetic actions are capable of being
reflected, refracted, polarized, and twisted, in the same way as
ordinary light-waves can be, and that the laws of optics are applicable
to both.

A common conception of the ether has been that it is a finer-grained
substance than ordinary matter, but otherwise so like the latter that
the laws found to hold good with matter were equally applicable to the
ether, and hence the mechanical conceptions formed from experience in
regard to the one have been transferred to the other, and the properties
belonging to one, such as density, elasticity, etc., have been asserted
as properties of the other.

There is so considerable a body of knowledge bearing upon the
similarities and dissimilarities of these two entities that it will be
well to compare them. After such comparison one will be better able to
judge of the propriety of assuming them to be subject to identical laws.

Matter is made up of atoms having dimensions approximately determined to
be in the neighbourhood of the one fifty-millionth of an inch in
diameter. These atoms may have various degrees of aggregation;--they may
be in practical contact, as in most solid bodies such as metals and
rocks; in molecular groupings as in water, and in gases such as
hydrogen, oxygen, and so forth, where two, three, or more atoms cohere
so strongly as to enable the molecules to act under ordinary
circumstances like simple particles. Any or all of these molecules and
atoms may be separated by any assignable distance from each other. Thus,
in common air the molecules, though rapidly changing their positions,
are on the average about two hundred and fifty times their own diameter
apart. This is a distance relatively greater than the distance apart of
the earth and the moon, for two hundred and fifty times the diameter of
the earth will be 8000 × 250 = 2,000,000 miles, while the distance to
the moon is but 240,000 miles. The sun is 93,000,000 miles from the
earth, and the most of the bodies of the solar system are still more
widely separated, Neptune being nearly 3000 millions of miles from the
sun. As for the fixed stars, they are so far separated from us that, at
the present rate of motion of the solar system in its drift through
space--500 millions of miles in a year--it would take not less than
40,000 years to reach the nearest star among its neighbours, while for
the more remote ones millions of years must be reckoned. The huge space
separating these masses is practically devoid of matter; it is a vacuum.

The idea of continuity as distinguished from discontinuity may be gained
by considering what would be made visible by magnification. Water
appears to the eye as if it were without pores, but if sugar or salt be
put into it, either will be dissolved and quite disappear among the
molecules of the water as steam does in the air, which shows that there
are some unoccupied spaces between the molecules. If a microscope be
employed to magnify a minute drop of water it still shows the same lack
of structure as that looked at with the unaided eye. If the magnifying
power be the highest it may reveal a speck as small as the
hundred-thousandth part of an inch, yet the speck looks no different in
character. We know that water is composed of two different kinds of
atoms, hydrogen and oxygen, for they can be separated by chemical means
and kept in separate bottles, and again made to combine to form water
having all the qualities that belonged to it before it was decomposed.
If a very much higher magnifying power were available, we should
ultimately be able to see the individual water molecules, and recognize
their hydrogen and oxygen constituents by their difference in size, rate
of movements, and we might possibly separate them by mechanical methods.
What one would see would be something very different in structure from
the water as it appears to our eyes. If the ether were similarly to be
examined through higher and still higher magnifying powers, even up to
infinity, there is no reason for thinking that the last examination
would show anything different in structure or quality from that which
was examined with low power or with no microscope at all. This is all
expressed by saying that the ether is a continuous substance, without
interstices, that it fills space completely, and, unlike gases,
liquids, and solids, is incapable of absorbing or dissolving anything.

There appears to be a definite amount of matter in the visible universe,
a definite number of molecules and atoms. How many molecules there are
in a cubic inch of air under ordinary pressure has been determined, and
is represented approximately by a huge number, something like a thousand
million million millions.

When the diameter of a molecule has been measured, as it has been
approximately, and found to be about one fifty-millionth of an inch,
then fifty million in a row would reach an inch, and the cube of fifty
million is 125,000,000000,000000,000000, one hundred and twenty-five
thousand million million millions. In a cubic foot there will of course
be 1728 times that number. One may if one likes find how many there may
be in the earth, and moon, sun and planets, for the dimensions of them
are all very well known. Only the multiplication table need be used, and
the sum of all these will give how many molecules there are in the solar
system. If one should feel that the number thus obtained was not very
accurate, he might reflect that if there were ten times as many it would
add but another cipher to a long line of similar ones and would not
materially modify it. The point is that there is a definite, computable
number. If one will then add to these the number of molecules in the
more distant stars and nebulæ, of which there are visible about
100,000,000, making such estimate of their individual size as he thinks
prudent, the sum of all will give the number of molecules in the visible
universe. The number is not so large but it can be written down in a
minute or two. Those who have been to the pains to do the sum say it may
be represented by seven followed by ninety-one ciphers. One could easily
compute how many molecules so large a space would contain if it were
full and as closely packed as they are in a drop of water, but there
would be a finite and not an infinite number, and therefore there is a
limited number of atoms in the visible universe.


The evidence for this comes to us from the phenomena of light.
Experimentally, ether waves of all lengths are found to have a velocity
of 186,000 miles in a second. It takes about eight minutes to reach us
from the sun, four hours from Neptune the most distant planet, and from
the nearest fixed star about three and a half years. Astronomers tell us
that some visible stars are so distant that their light requires not
less than ten thousand years and probably more to reach us, though
travelling at the enormous rate of 186,000 miles a second. This means
that the whole of space is filled with this medium. If there were any
vacant spaces, the light would fail to get through them, and stars
beyond them would become invisible. There are no such vacant spaces, for
any part of the heavens shows stars beaming continuously, and every
increase in telescopic power shows stars still further removed than any
seen before. The whole of this intervening space must therefore be
filled with the ether. Some of the waves that reach us are not more than
the hundred-thousandth of an inch long, so there can be no crack or
break or absence of ether from so small a section as the
hundred-thousandth of an inch in all this great expanse. More than this.
No one can think that the remotest visible stars are upon the boundary
of space, that if one could get to the most distant star he would have
on one side the whole of space while the opposite side would be devoid
of it. Space we know is of three dimensions, and a straight line may be
prolonged in any direction to an infinite distance, and a ray of light
may travel on for an infinite time and come to no end provided space be
filled with ether.

How long the sun and stars have been shining no one knows, but it is
highly probable that the sun has existed for not less than 1000 million
years, and has during that time been pouring its rays as radiant energy
into space. If then in half that time, or 500 millions of years, the
light had somewhere reached a boundary to the ether, it could not have
gone beyond but would have been reflected back into the ether-filled
space, and such part of the sky would be lit up by this reflected light.
There is no indication that anything like reflection comes to us from
the sky. This is equivalent to saying that the ether fills space in
every direction away from us to an unlimited distance, and so far is
itself unlimited.

The various kinds of matter we are acquainted with are commonly called
the elements. These when combined in various ways exhibit characteristic
phenomena which depend upon the kinds of matter, the structure and
motions which are involved. There are some seventy different kinds of
this elemental matter which may be identified as constituents of the
earth. Many of the same elements have been identified in the sun and
stars, such for instance as hydrogen, carbon, and iron. Such phenomena
lead us to conclude that the kinds of matter elsewhere in the universe
are identical with such as we are familiar with, and that elsewhere the
variety is as great. The qualities of the elements, within a certain
range of temperature, are permanent; they are not subject to
fluctuations, though the qualities of combinations of them may vary
indefinitely. The elements therefore may be regarded as retaining their
identity in all ordinary experience.

One part of the ether is precisely like any other part everywhere and
always, and there are no such distinctions in it as correspond with the
elemental forms of matter.

There is an ultimate particle of each one of the elements which is
practically absolute and known as an atom. The atom retains its identity
through all combinations and processes. It may be here or there, move
fast or slow, but its atomic form persists.

One might infer, from what has already been said about continuity, that
the ether could not be constituted of separable particles like masses of
matter; for no matter how minute they might be, there would be
interspaces and unoccupied spaces which would present us with phenomena
which have never been seen. It is the general consensus of opinion
among those who have studied the subject that the ether is not atomic in
structure.

Every atom of every element is so like every other atom of the same
element as to exhibit the same characteristics, size, weight, chemical
activity, vibratory rate, etc., and it is thus shown conclusively that
the structural form of the elemental particles is the same for each
element, for such characteristic reactions as they exhibit could hardly
be if they were mechanically unlike.

Of what form the atoms of an element may be is not very definitely
known. The earlier philosophers assumed them to be hard round particles,
but later thinkers have concluded that atoms of such a character are
highly improbable, for they could not exhibit in this case the
properties which the elements do exhibit. They have therefore dismissed
such a conception from consideration. In place of this hypothesis has
been substituted a very different idea, namely, that an atom is a
vortex-ring[1] of ether floating in the ether, as a smoke-ring puffed
out by a locomotive in still air may float in the air and show various
phenomena.

Vortex-rings for illustration may be made by having a
wooden box about a foot on a side, with a round orifice in the middle of
one side, and the side opposite covered with stout cloth stretched tight
over a framework. A saucer containing strong ammonia water, and another
containing strong hydrochloric acid, will cause dense fumes in the box,
and a tap with the hand upon the cloth back will force out a ring from
the orifice. These may be made to follow and strike each other,
rebounding and vibrating, apparently attracting each other and being
attracted by neighbouring bodies.

By filling the mouth with smoke, and pursing the lips as if to make the
sound _o_, one may make fifteen or twenty small rings by snapping the
cheek with the finger.

A vortex-ring produced in the air behaves in the most surprising manner.

Such rings formed in air by a locomotive may rise wriggling in the air
to the height of several hundred feet, but they are soon dissolved and
disappear. This is because the friction and viscosity of the air robs
the rings of their substance and energy. If the air were without
friction this could not happen, and the rings would then be persistent,
and would retain all their qualities.

Suppose then that such rings were produced in a medium without friction
as the ether is believed to be, they would be permanent structures with
a variety of properties. They would occupy space, have definite form and
dimensions, momentum, energy, attraction and repulsion, elasticity; obey
the laws of motion, and so far behave quite like such matter as we know.
For such reasons it is thought by some persons to be not improbable
that the atoms of matter are minute vortex-rings of ether in the ether.
That which distinguishes the atom from the ether is the form of motion
which is embodied in it, and if the motion were simply arrested, there
would be nothing to distinguish the atom from the ether into which it
dissolved. In other words, such a conception makes the atoms of matter a
form of motion of the ether, and not a created something put into the
ether.

If the ether be the boundless substance described, it is clear it can
have no form as a whole, and if it be continuous it can have no minute
structure. If not constituted of atoms or molecules there is nothing
descriptive that can be said about it. A molecule or a particular mass
of matter could be identified by its form, and is thus in marked
contrast with any portion of ether, for the latter could not be
identified in a similar way. One may therefore say that the ether is
formless.

The law of gravitation is held as being universal. According to it every
particle of matter in the universe attracts every other particle. The
evidence for this law in the solar system is complete. Sun, planets,
satellites, comets and meteors are all controlled by gravitation, and
the movements of double stars testify to its activity among the more
distant bodies of the universe. The attraction does not depend upon the
kind of matter nor the arrangement of molecules or atoms, but upon the
amount or mass of matter present, and if it be of a definite kind of
matter, as of hydrogen or iron, the gravitative action is proportional
to the number of atoms.

One might infer already that if the ether were structureless, physical
laws operative upon such material substances as atoms could not be
applicable to it, and so indeed all the evidence we have shows that
gravitation is not one of its properties. If it were, and it behaved in
any degree like atomic structures, it would be found to be denser in the
neighbourhood of large bodies like the earth, planets, and the sun.
Light would be turned from its straight path while travelling in such
denser medium, or made to move with less velocity. There is not the
slightest indication of any such effect anywhere within the range of
astronomical vision.

Gravitation then is a property belonging to matter and not to ether.
The impropriety of thinking or speaking of the ether as matter of any
kind will be apparent if one reflects upon the significance of the law
of gravitation as stated. Every particle of matter in the universe
attracts every other particle. If there be anything else in the universe
which has no such quality, then it should not be called matter, else the
law should read: Some particles of matter attract some other particles,
which would be no law at all, for a real physical law has no exceptions
any more than the multiplication table has. Physical laws are physical
relations, and all such relations are quantitative.

A bullet shot into the air has its velocity continuously reduced by the
air, to which its energy is imparted by making it move out of its way. A
railway train is brought to rest by the friction brake upon the wheels.
The translatory energy of the train is transformed into the molecular
energy called heat. The steamship requires to propel it fast, a large
amount of coal for its engines, because the water in which it moves
offers great friction--resistance which must be overcome. Whenever one
surface of matter is moved in contact with another surface there is a
resistance called friction, the moving body loses its rate of motion,
and will presently be brought to rest unless energy be continuously
supplied. This is true for masses of matter of all sizes and with all
kinds of motion. Friction is the condition for the transformation of all
kinds of mechanical motions into heat. The test of the amount of
friction is the rate of loss of motion. A top will spin some time in the
air because its point is small. It will spin longer on a plate than on
the carpet, and longer in a vacuum than in the air, for it does not have
the air friction to resist it, and there is no kind or form of matter
not subject to frictional resistance.

The earth is a mass of matter moving in the ether. In the equatorial
region the velocity of a point is more than a thousand miles in an hour,
for the circumference of the earth is 25,000 miles, and it turns once on
its axis in 24 hours, which is the length of the day. If the earth were
thus spinning in the atmosphere, the latter not being in motion, the
wind would blow with ten times hurricane velocity. The friction would be
so great that nothing but the foundation rocks of the earth's crust
could withstand it, and the velocity of rotation would be reduced
appreciably in a relatively short time. Astronomical observations
show that the length of the day has certainly not changed so much as the
tenth of a second during the past 2000 years. The earth also revolves
about the sun, having a speed of about 19 miles in a second, or 68,000
miles an hour. This motion of the earth and the other planets about the
sun is one of the most stable phenomena we know. The mean distance and
period of revolution of every planet is unalterable in the long run. 
They assert that a change in the length of a year by so much as the
hundredth part of a second has not happened during the past thousand
years. This then is testimony, that a velocity of nineteen miles a
second for a thousand years has produced no effect upon the earth's
motion that is noticeable. Some years ago a comet was noticed to have 
its periodic time shortened an hour or two, and the explanation offered at first was
that the shortening was due to friction in the ether although no other
comet was thus affected. The idea was soon abandoned, and to-day there
is no astronomical evidence that bodies having translatory motion in the
ether meet with any frictional resistance whatever. If a stone could be
thrown in interstellar space with a velocity of fifty feet a second it
would continue to move in a straight line with the same speed for any
assignable time.

As has been said, light moves with the velocity of 186,000 miles per
second, and it may pursue its course for tens of thousands of years.
There is no evidence that it ever loses either its wave-length or
energy. It is not transformed as friction would transform it, else there
would be some distance at which light of given wave-length and amplitude
would be quite extinguished. The light from distant stars would be
different in character from that coming from nearer stars. Furthermore,
as the whole solar system is drifting in space some 500,000,000 of miles
in a year, new stars would be coming into view in that direction, and
faint stars would be dropping out of sight in the opposite direction, a
phenomenon which has not been observed. Altogether the testimony seems
conclusive that the ether is a frictionless medium, and does not
transform mechanical motion into heat.

That is, its properties are not alike in all directions. Chemical
phenomena, crystallization, magnetic and electrical phenomena show each
in their way that the properties of atoms are not alike on opposite
faces. Atoms combine to form molecules, and molecules arrange themselves
in certain definite geometric forms such as cubes, tetrahedra, hexagonal
prisms and stellate forms, with properties emphasized on certain faces
or ends. Thus quartz will twist a ray of light in one direction or the
other, depending upon the arrangement which may be known by the external
form of the crystal. Calc spar will break up a ray of light into two
parts if the light be sent through it in certain directions, but not if
in another. Tourmaline polarizes light sent through its sides and
becomes positively electrified at one end while being heated. Some
substances will conduct sound or light or heat or electricity better in
one direction than in another. All matter is magnetic in some degree,
and that implies polarity. If one will recall the structure of a
vortex-ring, he will see how all the motion is inward on one side and
outward on the other, which gives different properties to the two sides:
a push away from it on one side and a pull toward it on the other.

That is, its properties are alike in every direction. There is no
distinction due to position. A mass of matter will move as freely in one
direction as in another; a ray of light of any wave-length will travel
in it in one direction as freely as in any other; neither velocity nor
direction are changed by the action of the ether alone.

When the elements combine to form molecules they always combine in
definite ways and in definite proportions. Carbon will combine with
hydrogen, but will drop it if it can get oxygen. Oxygen will combine
with iron or lead or sodium, but cannot be made to combine with
fluorine. No more than two atoms of oxygen can be made to unite with one
carbon atom, nor more than one hydrogen with one chlorine atom. There is
thus an apparent choice for the kind and number of associates in
molecular structure, and the instability of a molecule depends
altogether upon the presence in its neighbourhood of other atoms for
which some of the elements in the molecule have a stronger attraction
or affinity than they have for the atoms they are now combined with.
Thus iron is not stable in the presence of water molecules, and it
becomes iron oxide; iron oxide is not stable in the presence of hot
sulphur, it becomes an iron sulphide. All the elements are thus
selective, and it is by such means that they may be chemically
identified.

There is no phenomenon in the ether that is comparable with this.
Evidently there could not be unless there were atomic structures having
in some degree different characteristics which we know the ether to be
without.

It is possible to arrange the elements in the order of their atomic
weights in columns which will show communities of property. Newlands,
Mendeléeff, Meyer, and others have done this. The explanation for such
an arrangement has not yet been forthcoming, but that it expresses a
real fact is certain, for in the original scheme there were several gaps
representing undiscovered elements, the properties of which were
predicted from that of their associates in the table. Some of these have
since been discovered, and their atomic weight and physical properties
accord with those predicted.

With the ether such a scheme is quite impossible, for the very evident
reason that there are no different things to have relation with each
other. Every part is just like every other part. Where there are no
differences and no distinctions there can be no relations. The ether is
quite harmonic without relations.

So long as the atoms of matter were regarded as hard round particles,
they were assumed to be inert and only active when acted upon by what
were called forces, which were held to be entities of some sort,
independent of matter. These could pull or push it here or there, but
the matter was itself incapable of independent activity. All this is now
changed, and we are called upon to consider every atom as being itself a
form of energy in the same sense as heat or light are forms of energy,
the energy being embodied in particular forms of motion. Light, for
instance, is a wave motion of the ether. An atom is a rotary ring of
ether. Stop the wave motion, and the light would be annihilated. Stop
the rotation, and the atom would be annihilated for the same reason. As
the ray of light is a particular embodiment of energy, and has no
existence apart from it, so an atom is to be regarded as an embodiment
of energy. On a previous page it is said that energy is the ability of
one body to act upon and move another in some degree. An atom of any
kind is not the inert thing it has been supposed to be, for it can do
something. Even at absolute zero, when all its vibratory or heat energy
would be absent, it would be still an elastic whirling body pulling upon
every other atom in the universe with gravitational energy, twisting
other atoms into conformity with its own position with its magnetic
energy; and, if such ether rings are like the rings which are made in
air, will not stand still in one place even if no others act upon it,
but will start at once by its own inherent energy to move in a right
line at right angles to its own plane and in the direction of the whirl
inside the ring. Two rings of wood or iron might remain in contact with
each other for an indefinite time, but vortex-rings will not, but will
beat each other away as two spinning tops will do if they touch ever so
gently. If they do not thus separate it is because there are other forms
of energy acting to press them together, but such external pressure will
be lessened by the rings' own reactions.

It is true that in a frictionless medium like the ether one cannot at
present see how such vortex-rings could be produced in it. Certainly not
by any such mechanical methods as are employed to make smoke-rings in
air, for the friction of the air is the condition for producing them.
However they came to be, there is implied the previous existence of the
ether and of energy in some form capable of acting upon it in a manner
radically different from any known in physical science.

There is good spectroscopic evidence that in some way elements of
different kinds are now being formed in nebulæ, for the simplest show
the presence of hydrogen alone. As they increase in complexity other
elements are added, until the spectrum exhibits all the elements we know
of. It has thus seemed likely either that most of what are called
elements are composed of molecular groupings of some fundamental
element, which by proper physical methods might be decomposed, as one
can now decompose a molecule of ammonia or sulphuric acid, or that the
elements are now being created by some extra-physical process in those
far-off regions. In either case an atom is the embodiment of energy in
such a form as to be permanent under ordinary physical circumstances,
but of which, if in any manner it should be destroyed, only the form
would be lost. The ether would remain, and the energy which was embodied
would be distributed in other ways.

The distinction between energy in matter and energy in the ether will be
apparent, on considering that both the ether and energy in some form
must be conceived as existing independent of matter; though every atom
were annihilated, the ether would remain and all the energy embodied in
the atoms would be still in existence in the ether. The atomic energy
would simply be dissolved. One can easily conceive the ether as the same
space-filling, continuous, unlimited medium, without an atom in it. On
this assumption it is clear that no form of energy with which we have to
deal in physical science would have any existence in the ether; for
every one of those forms, gravitational, thermal, electric, magnetic, or
any other--all are the results of the forms of energy in matter. If
there were no atoms, there would be no gravitation, for that is the
attraction of atoms upon each other. If there were no atoms, there could
be no atomic vibration, therefore no heat, and so on for each and all.
Nevertheless, if an atom be the embodiment of energy, there must have
been energy in the ether before any atom existed. One of the properties
of the ether is its ability to distribute energy in certain ways, but
there is no evidence that of itself it ever transforms energy. Once a
given kind of energy is in it, it does not change; hence for the
apparition of a form of energy, like the first vortex-ring, there must
have been not only energy, but some other agency capable of transforming
that energy into a permanent structure. To the best of our knowledge
to-day, the ether would be absolutely helpless. Such energy as was
active in forming atoms must be called by another name than what is
appropriate for such transformations as occur when, for instance, the
mechanical energy of a bullet is transformed into heat when the target
is struck. Behind the ether must be assumed some agency, directing and
controlling energy in a manner totally different from any agency, which
is operative in what we call physical science. Nothing short of what is
called a miracle will do--an event without a physical antecedent in any
way necessarily related to its factors, as is the fact of a stone
related to gravity or heat to an electric current.

Ether energy is an endowment instead of being an embodiment, and implies
antecedents of a super-physical kind.

As each different kind of energy represents some specific form of
motion, and vice versa, some sort of mechanism is needful for
transforming one kind into another, therefore molecular structure of
one kind or another is essential. The transformation is a mechanical
process, and matter in some particular and appropriate form is the
condition of its taking place. If heat appears, then its antecedent has
been some other form of motion acting upon the substance heated. It may
have been the mechanical motion of another mass of matter, as when a
bullet strikes a target and becomes heated; or it may be friction, as
when a car-axle heats when run without proper oiling to reduce friction;
or it may be condensation, as when tinder is ignited by condensing the
air about it; or chemical reactions, when molecular structure is changed
as in combustion, or an electrical current, which implies a dynamo and
steam-engine or water-power. If light appears, its antecedent has been
impact or friction, condensation or chemical action, and if electricity
appears the same sort of antecedents are present. Whether the one or the
other of these forms of energy is developed, depends upon what kind of a
structure the antecedent energy has acted upon. If radiant energy,
so-called, falls upon a mass of matter, what is absorbed is at once
transformed into heat or into electric or magnetic effects; _which_ one
of these depends upon the character of the mechanism upon which the
radiant energy acts, but the radiant energy itself, which consists of
ether-waves, is traceable back in every case to a mass of matter having
definite characteristic motions.

One may therefore say with certainty that every physical phenomenon is a
change in the direction, or velocity, or character, of the energy
present, and such change has been produced by matter acting as a
transformer.

It has already been said that the absence of friction in the ether
enables light-waves to maintain their identity for an indefinite time,
and to an indefinitely great distance. In a uniform, homogeneous
substance of any kind, any kind of energy which might be in it would
continue in it without any change. Uniformity and homogeneity imply
similarity throughout, and the necessary condition for transformation is
unlikeness. One might not look for any kind of physical phenomenon which
was not due to the presence and activity of some heterogeneity.

As a ray of light continues a ray of light so long as it exists in free
ether, so all kinds of radiations, of whatever wave-length, continue
identical until they fall upon some mechanical structure called matter.
Translatory motion continues translatory, rotary continues rotary, and
vibratory continues to be vibratory, and no transforming change can
take place in the absence of matter. The ether is helpless.

It is commonly stated that certain substances, like putty and dough, are
inelastic, while some other substances, like glass, steel, and wood, are
elastic. This quality of elasticity, as manifested in such different
degrees, depends upon molecular combinations; some of which, as in glass
and steel, are favourable for exhibiting it, while others mask it, for
the ultimate atoms of all kinds are certainly highly elastic.

The measure of elasticity in a mass of matter is the velocity with which
a wave-motion will be transmitted through it. Thus the elasticity of the
air determines the velocity of sound in it. If the air be heated, the
elasticity is increased and the sound moves faster. The rates of such
sound-conduction range from a few feet in a second to about 16,000, five
times swifter than a cannon ball. In such elastic bodies as vibrate to
and fro like the prongs of a tuning-fork, or give sounds of a definite
pitch, the rate of vibration is determined by the size and shape of the
body as well as by their elementary composition. The smaller a body is,
the higher its vibratory rate, if it be made of the same material and
the form remains the same. Thus a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket, may vibrate 500 times a second. If it were only
the fifty-millionth of an inch in size, but of the same material and
form, it would vibrate 30,000,000000 times a second; and if it were made
of ether, instead of steel, it would vibrate as many times faster as the
velocity of waves in the ether is greater than it is in steel, and would
be as many as 400,000000,000000 times per second. The amount of
displacement, or the amplitude of vibration, with the pocket-fork might
be no more than the hundredth of an inch, and this rate measured as
translation velocity would be but five inches per second. If the fork
were of atomic magnitude, and should swing its sides one half the
diameter of the atom, or say the hundred-millionth of an inch, the
translational velocity would be equivalent to about eighty miles a
second, or a hundred and fifty times the velocity of a cannon ball,
which may be reckoned at about 3000 feet. 