We have often heard it said that thoughts are things, and there are many
among us who are persuaded of the truth of this statement. Yet very few
of us have any clear idea as to what kind of thing a thought is, and the
object of this little book is to help us to conceive this.

There are some serious difficulties in our way, for our conception of
space is limited to three dimensions, and when we attempt to make a
drawing we practically limit ourselves to two. In reality the
presentation even of ordinary three-dimensional objects is seriously
defective, for scarcely a line or angle in our drawing is accurately
shown. If a road crosses the picture, the part in the foreground must be
represented as enormously wider than that in the background, although in
reality the width is unchanged. If a house is to be drawn, the right
angles at its corners must be shown as acute or obtuse as the case may
be, but hardly ever as they actually are. In fact, we draw everything
not as it is but as it appears, and the effort of the artist is by a
skilful arrangement of lines upon a flat surface to convey to the eye an
impression which shall recall that made by a three-dimensional object.

It is possible to do this only because similar objects are already
familiar to those who look at the picture and accept the suggestion
which it conveys. A person who had never seen a tree could form but
little idea of one from even the most skilful painting. If to this
difficulty we add the other and far more serious one of a limitation of
consciousness, and suppose ourselves to be showing the picture to a
being who knew only two dimensions, we see how utterly impossible it
would be to convey to him any adequate impression of such a landscape as
we see. Precisely this difficulty in its most aggravated form stands in
our way, when we try to make a drawing of even a very simple
thought-form. The vast majority of those who look at the picture are
absolutely limited to the consciousness of three dimensions, and
furthermore, have not the slightest conception of that inner world to
which thought-forms belong, with all its splendid light and colour. All
that we can do at the best is to represent a section of the
thought-form; and those whose faculties enable them to see the original
cannot but be disappointed with any reproduction of it. Still, those who
are at present unable to see anything will gain at least a partial
comprehension, and however inadequate it may be it is at least better
than nothing.

All students know that what is called the aura of man is the outer part
of the cloud-like substance of his higher bodies, interpenetrating each
other, and extending beyond the confines of his physical body, the
smallest of all. They know also that two of these bodies, the mental and
desire bodies, are those chiefly concerned with the appearance of what
are called thought-forms. But in order that the matter may be made clear
for all, and not only for students already acquainted with theosophical
teachings, a recapitulation of the main facts will not be out of place.

When the man's energy flows outwards towards external objects of desire,
or is occupied in passional and emotional activities, this energy works
in a less subtle order of matter than the mental, in that of the astral
world. What is called his desire-body is composed of this matter, and it
forms the most prominent part of the aura in the undeveloped man. Where
the man is of a gross type, the desire-body is of the denser matter of
the astral plane, and is dull in hue, browns and dirty greens and reds
playing a great part in it. Through this will flash various
characteristic colours, as his passions are excited. A man of a higher
type has his desire-body composed of the finer qualities of astral
matter, with the colours, rippling over and flashing through it, fine
and clear in hue. While less delicate and less radiant than the mental
body, it forms a beautiful object, and as selfishness is eliminated all
the duller and heavier shades disappear.

This desire (or astral) body gives rise to a second class of entities,
similar in their general constitution to the thought-forms already
described, but limited to the astral plane, and generated by the mind
under the dominion of the animal nature.

These are caused by the activity of the lower mind, throwing itself out
through the astral body--the activity of Kâma-Manas in theosophical
terminology, or the mind dominated by desire. Vibrations in the body of
desire, or astral body, are in this case set up, and under these this
body throws off a vibrating portion of itself, shaped, as in the
previous case, by the nature of the vibrations, and this attracts to
itself some of the appropriate elemental essence of the astral world.
Such a thought-form has for its body this elemental essence, and for its
animating soul the desire or passion which threw it forth; according to
the amount of mental energy combined with this desire or passion will
be the force of the thought-form. These, like those belonging to the
mental plane, are called artificial elementals, and they are by far the
most common, as few thoughts of ordinary men and women are untinged with
desire, passion, or emotion.

Each definite thought produces a double effect--a radiating vibration
and a floating form. The thought itself appears first to clairvoyant
sight as a vibration in the mental body, and this may be either simple
or complex. If the thought itself is absolutely simple, there is only
the one rate of vibration, and only one type of mental matter will be
strongly affected. The mental body is composed of matter of several
degrees of density, which we commonly arrange in classes according to
the sub-planes. Of each of these we have many sub-divisions, and if we
typify these by drawing horizontal lines to indicate the different
degrees of density, there is another arrangement which we might
symbolise by drawing perpendicular lines at right angles to the others,
to denote types which differ in quality as well as in density. There are
thus many varieties of this mental matter, and it is found that each one
of these has its own especial and appropriate rate of vibration, to
which it seems most accustomed, so that it very readily responds to it,
and tends to return to it as soon as possible when it has been forced
away from it by some strong rush of thought or feeling. When a sudden
wave of some emotion sweeps over a man, for example, his astral body is
thrown into violent agitation, and its original colours are or the time
almost obscured by the flush of carmine, of blue, or of scarlet which
corresponds with the rate of vibration of that particular emotion. This
change is only temporary; it passes off in a few seconds, and the astral
body rapidly resumes its usual condition. Yet every such rush of feeling
produces a permanent effect: it always adds a little of its hue to the
normal colouring of the astral body, so that every time that the man
yields himself to a certain emotion it becomes easier for him to yield
himself to it again, because his astral body is getting into the habit
of vibrating at that especial rate.

The majority of human thoughts, however, are by no means simple.
Absolutely pure affection of course exists; but we very often find it
tinged with pride or with selfishness, with jealousy or with animal
passion. This means that at least two separate vibrations appear both in
the mental and astral bodies--frequently more than two. The radiating
vibration, therefore, will be a complex one, and the resultant
thought-form will show several colours instead of only one.

These radiating vibrations, like all others in nature, become less
powerful in proportion to the distance from their source, though it is
probable that the variation is in proportion to the cube of the distance
instead of to the square, because of the additional dimension involved.
Again, like all other vibrations, these tend to reproduce themselves
whenever opportunity is offered to them; and so whenever they strike
upon another mental body they tend to provoke in it their own rate of
motion. That is--from the point of view of the man whose mental body is
touched by these waves--they tend to produce in his mind thoughts of the
same type as that which had previously arisen in the mind of the thinker
who sent forth the waves. The distance to which such thought-waves
penetrate, and the force and persistency with which they impinge upon
the mental bodies of others, depend upon the strength and clearness of
the original thought. In this way the thinker is in the same position as
the speaker. The voice of the latter sets in motion waves of sound in
the air which radiate from him in all directions, and convey his message
to all those who are within hearing, and the distance to which his voice
can penetrate depends upon its power and upon the clearness of his
enunciation. In just the same way the forceful thought will carry very
much further than the weak and undecided thought; but clearness and
definiteness are of even greater importance than strength. Again, just
as the speaker's voice may fall upon heedless ears where men are already
engaged in business or in pleasure, so may a mighty wave of thought
sweep past without affecting the mind of the man, if he be already
deeply engrossed in some other line of thought.

It should be understood that this radiating vibration conveys the
character of the thought, but not its subject. They naturally act with special vigour upon
those minds already habituated to vibrations of similar character; yet
they have some effect on every mental body upon which they impinge, so
that their tendency is to awaken the power of higher thought in those to
whom it has not yet become a custom. It is thus evident that every man
who thinks along high lines is doing missionary work, even though he may
be entirely unconscious of it.

Let us turn now to the second effect of thought, the creation of a
definite form. All students of the occult are acquainted with the idea
of the elemental essence, that strange half-intelligent life which
surrounds us in all directions, vivifying the matter of the mental and
astral planes. This matter thus animated responds very readily to the
influence of human thought, and every impulse sent out, either from the
mental body or from the astral body of man, immediately clothes itself
in a temporary vehicle of this vitalised matter. Such a thought or
impulse becomes for the time a kind of living creature, the
thought-force being the soul, and the vivified matter the body. Instead
of using the somewhat clumsy paraphrase, "astral or mental matter
ensouled by the monadic essence at the stage of one of the elemental
kingdoms," theosophical writers often, for brevity's sake, call this
quickened matter simply elemental essence; and sometimes they speak of
the thought-form as "an elemental." There may be infinite variety in the
colour and shape of such elementals or thought-forms, for each thought
draws round it the matter which is appropriate for its expression, and
sets that matter into vibration in harmony with its own; so that the
character of the thought decides its colour, and the study of its
variations and combinations is an exceedingly interesting one.

This thought-form may not inaptly be compared to a Leyden jar, the
coating of living essence being symbolised by the jar, and the thought
energy by the charge of electricity. If the man's thought or feeling is
directly connected with someone else, the resultant thought-form moves
towards that person and discharges itself upon his astral and mental
bodies. If the man's thought is about himself, or is based upon a
personal feeling, as the vast majority of thoughts are, it hovers round
its creator and is always ready to react upon him whenever he is for a
moment in a passive condition. For example, a man who yields himself to
thoughts of impurity may forget all about them while he is engaged in
the daily routine of his business, even though the resultant forms are
hanging round him in a heavy cloud, because his attention is otherwise
directed and his astral body is therefore not impressible by any other
rate of vibration than its own. When, however, the marked vibration
slackens and the man rests after his labours and leaves his mind blank
as regards definite thought, he is very likely to feel the vibration of
impurity stealing insidiously upon him. If the consciousness of the man
be to any extent awakened, he may perceive this and cry out that he is
being tempted by the devil; yet the truth is that the temptation is from
without only in appearance, since it is nothing but the natural reaction
upon him of his own thought-forms. Each man travels through space
enclosed within a cage of his own building, surrounded by a mass of the
forms created by his habitual thoughts. Through this medium he looks out
upon the world, and naturally he sees everything tinged with its
predominant colours, and all rates of vibration which reach him from
without are more or less modified by its rate. Thus until the man learns
complete control of thought and feeling, he sees nothing as it really
is, since all his observations must be made through this medium, which
distorts and colours everything like badly-made glass.

If the thought-form be neither definitely personal nor specially aimed
at someone else, it simply floats detached in the atmosphere, all the
time radiating vibrations similar to those originally sent forth by its
creator. If it does not come into contact with any other mental body,
this radiation gradually exhausts its store of energy, and in that case
the form falls to pieces; but if it succeeds in awakening sympathetic
vibration in any mental body near at hand, an attraction is set up, and
the thought-form is usually absorbed by that mental body. Thus we see
that the influence of the thought-form is by no means so far-reaching as
that of the original vibration; but in so far as it acts, it acts with
much greater precision. What it produces in the mind-body which it
influences is not merely a thought of an order similar to that which
gave it birth; it is actually the same thought. The radiation may affect
thousands and stir up in them thoughts on the same level as the
original, and yet it may happen that no one of them will be identical
with that original; the thought-form can affect only very few, but in
those few cases it will reproduce exactly the initiatory idea.

The fact of the creation by vibrations of a distinct form, geometrical
or other, is already familiar to every student of acoustics, and
"Chladni's" figures are continually reproduced in every physical
laboratory.

The table of colours given in the frontispiece has already been
thoroughly described in the book _Man Visible and Invisible_, and the
meaning to be attached to them is just the same in the thought-form as
in the body out of which it is evolved. For the sake of those who have
not at hand the full description given in the book just mentioned, it
will be well to state that black means hatred and malice. Red, of all
shades from lurid brick-red to brilliant scarlet, indicates anger;
brutal anger will show as flashes of lurid red from dark brown clouds,
while the anger of "noble indignation" is a vivid scarlet, by no means
unbeautiful, though it gives an unpleasant thrill; a particularly dark
and unpleasant red, almost exactly the colour called dragon's blood,
shows animal passion and sensual desire of various kinds. Clear brown
(almost burnt sienna) shows avarice; hard dull brown-grey is a sign of
selfishness--a colour which is indeed painfully common; deep heavy grey
signifies depression, while a livid pale grey is associated with fear;
grey-green is a signal of deceit, while brownish-green (usually flecked
with points and flashes of scarlet) betokens jealousy. Green seems
always to denote adaptability; in the lowest case, when mingled with
selfishness, this adaptability becomes deceit; at a later stage, when
the colour becomes purer, it means rather the wish to be all things to
all men, even though it may be chiefly for the sake of becoming popular
and bearing a good reputation with them; in its still higher, more
delicate and more luminous aspect, it shows the divine power of
sympathy. Affection expresses itself in all shades of crimson and rose;
a full clear carmine means a strong healthy affection of normal type; if
stained heavily with brown-grey, a selfish and grasping feeling is
indicated, while pure pale rose marks that absolutely unselfish love
which is possible only to high natures; it passes from the dull crimson
of animal love to the most exquisite shades of delicate rose, like the
early flushes of the dawning, as the love becomes purified from all
selfish elements, and flows out in wider and wider circles of generous
impersonal tenderness and compassion to all who are in need. With a
touch of the blue of devotion in it, this may express a strong
realisation of the universal brotherhood of humanity. Deep orange
imports pride or ambition, and the various shades of yellow denote
intellect or intellectual gratification, dull yellow ochre implying the
direction of such faculty to selfish purposes, while clear gamboge shows
a distinctly higher type, and pale luminous primrose yellow is a sign of
the highest and most unselfish use of intellectual power, the pure
reason directed to spiritual ends. The different shades of blue all
indicate religious feeling, and range through all hues from the dark
brown-blue of selfish devotion, or the pallid grey-blue of
fetish-worship tinged with fear, up to the rich deep clear colour of
heartfelt adoration, and the beautiful pale azure of that highest form
which implies self-renunciation and union with the divine; the
devotional thought of an unselfish heart is very lovely in colour, like
the deep blue of a summer sky. Through such clouds of blue will often
shine out golden stars of great brilliancy, darting upwards like a
shower of sparks. A mixture of affection and devotion is manifested by a
tint of violet, and the more delicate shades of this invariably show the
capacity of absorbing and responding to a high and beautiful ideal. The
brilliancy and the depth of the colours are usually a measure of the
strength and the activity of the feeling.

Another consideration which must not be forgotten is the type of matter
in which these forms are generated. If a thought be purely intellectual
and impersonal--for example, if the thinker is attempting to solve a
problem in algebra or geometry--the thought-form and the wave of
vibration will be confined entirely to the mental plane. If, however,
the thought be of a spiritual nature, if it be tinged with love and
aspiration or deep unselfish feeling, it will rise upwards from the
mental plane and will borrow much of the splendour and glory of the
buddhic level. In such a case its influence is exceedingly powerful, and
every such thought is a mighty force for good which cannot but produce a
decided effect upon all mental bodies within reach, if they contain any
quality at all capable of response.

If, on the other hand, the thought has in it something of self or of
personal desire, at once its vibration turns downwards, and it draws
round itself a body of astral matter in addition to its clothing of
mental matter. Such a thought-form is capable of acting upon the astral
bodies of other men as well as their minds, so that it can not only
raise thought within them, but can also stir up their feelings.

That which takes the image of the thinker. When a man thinks of
himself as in some distant place, or wishes earnestly to be in that
place, he makes a thought-form in his own image which appears there.
Such a form has not infrequently been seen by others, and has sometimes
been taken for the astral body or apparition of the man himself. In such
a case, either the seer must have enough of clairvoyance for the time to
be able to observe that astral shape, or the thought-form must have
sufficient strength to materialise itself--that is, to draw round itself
temporarily a certain amount of physical matter. The thought which
generates such a form as this must necessarily be a strong one, and it
therefore employs a larger proportion of the matter of the mental body,
so that though the form is small and compressed when it leaves the
thinker, it draws round it a considerable amount of astral matter, and
usually expands to life-size before it appears at its destination.

That which takes the image of some material object. When a man thinks
of his friend he forms within his mental body a minute image of that
friend, which often passes outward and usually floats suspended in the
air before him. In the same way if he thinks of a room, a house, a
landscape, tiny images of these things are formed within the mental body
and afterwards externalised. This is equally true when he is exercising
his imagination; the painter who forms a conception of his future
picture builds it up out of the matter of his mental body, and then
projects it into space in front of him, keeps it before his mind's eye,
and copies it. The novelist in the same way builds images of his
character in mental matter, and by the exercise of his will moves these
puppets from one position or grouping to another, so that the plot of
his story is literally acted out before him. With our curiously inverted
conceptions of reality it is hard for us to understand that these mental
images actually exist, and are so entirely objective that they may
readily be seen by the clairvoyant, and can even be rearranged by some
one other than their creator. Some novelists have been dimly aware of
such a process, and have testified that their characters when once
created developed a will of their own, and insisted on carrying the plot
of the story along lines quite different from those originally intended
by the author. This has actually happened, sometimes because the
thought-forms were ensouled by playful nature-spirits, or more often
because some 'dead' novelist, watching on the astral plane the
development of the plan of his fellow-author, thought that he could
improve upon it, and chose this method of putting forward his
suggestions.

That which takes a form entirely its own, expressing its inherent
qualities in the matter which it draws round it. Only thought-forms of
this third class can usefully be illustrated, for to represent those of
the first or second class would be merely to draw portraits or
landscapes. In those types we have the plastic mental or astral matter
moulded in imitation of forms belonging to the physical plane; in this
third group we have a glimpse of the forms natural to the astral or
mental planes. Yet this very fact, which makes them so interesting,
places an insuperable barrier in the way of their accurate reproduction.

Thought-forms of this third class almost invariably manifest themselves
upon the astral plane, as the vast majority of them are expressions of
feeling as well as of thought. Those of which we here give specimens are
almost wholly of that class, except that we take a few examples of the
beautiful thought-forms created in definite meditation by those who,
through long practice, have learnt how to think.

Thought-forms directed towards individuals produce definitely marked
effects, these effects being either partially reproduced in the aura of
the recipient and so increasing the total result, or repelled from it. A
thought of love and of desire to protect, directed strongly towards some
beloved object, creates a form which goes to the person thought of, and
remains in his aura as a shielding and protecting agent; it will seek
all opportunities to serve, and all opportunities to defend, not by a
conscious and deliberate action, but by a blind following out of the
impulse impressed upon it, and it will strengthen friendly forces that
impinge on the aura and weaken unfriendly ones. Thus may we create and
maintain veritable guardian angels round those we love, and many a
mother's prayer for a distant child thus circles round him, though she
knows not the method by which her "prayer is answered."

In cases in which good or evil thoughts are projected at individuals,
those thoughts, if they are to directly fulfil their mission, must find,
in the aura of the object to whom they are sent, materials capable of
responding sympathetically to their vibrations. Any combination of
matter can only vibrate within certain definite limits, and if the
thought-form be outside all the limits within which the aura is capable
of vibrating, it cannot affect that aura at all. It consequently
rebounds from it, and that with a force proportionate to the energy with
which it impinged upon it. This is why it is said that a pure heart and
mind are the best protectors against any inimical assaults, for such a
pure heart and mind will construct an astral and a mental body of fine
and subtle materials, and these bodies cannot respond to vibrations that
demand coarse and dense matter. If an evil thought, projected with
malefic intent, strikes such a body, it can only rebound from it, and it
is flung back with all its own energy; it then flies backward along the
magnetic line of least resistance, that which it has just traversed, and
strikes its projector; he, having matter in his astral and mental bodies
similar to that of the thought-form he generated, is thrown into
respondent vibrations, and suffers the destructive effects he had
intended to cause to another. Thus "curses [and blessings] come home to
roost." From this arise also the very serious effects of hating or
suspecting a good and highly-advanced man; the thought-forms sent
against him cannot injure him, and they rebound against their
projectors, shattering them mentally, morally, or physically. Several
such instances are well known to members of the Theosophical Society,
having come under their direct observation. So long as any of the
coarser kinds of matter connected with evil and selfish thoughts remain
in a person's body, he is open to attack from those who wish him evil,
but when he has perfectly eliminated these by self-purification his
haters cannot injure him, and he goes on calmly and peacefully amid all
the darts of their malice. But it is bad for those who shoot out such
darts.

Another point that should be mentioned before passing to the
consideration of our illustrations is that every one of the
thought-forms here given is drawn from life. They are not imaginary
forms, prepared as some dreamer thinks that they ought to appear; they
are representations of forms actually observed as thrown off by ordinary
men and women, and either reproduced with all possible care and fidelity
by those who have seen them, or with the help of artists to whom the
seers have described them.

A very striking contrast to the humiliating weakness shown in these two
forms is the splendid strength and decision of the third. Here we have
no amorphous mass with quivering lines and explosive fragments, but a
powerful, clear-cut and definite thought, obviously full of force and
resolution. For this is the thought of the officer in charge--the man
responsible for the lives and the safety of the passengers, and he rises
to the emergency in a most satisfactory manner. It does not even occur
to him to feel the least shadow of fear; he has no time for that. Though
the scarlet of the sharp point of his weapon-like thought-form shows
anger that the accident should have happened, the bold curve of orange
immediately above it betokens perfect self-confidence and certainty of
his power to deal with the difficulty. The brilliant yellow implies that
his intellect is already at work upon the problem, while the green which
runs side by side with it denotes the sympathy which he feels for those
whom he intends to save. A very striking and instructive group of
thought-forms.

The upper form represents a state of mind which is perhaps even more
harmful in its effects, for this is the gloating of the successful
gambler over his ill-gotten gain. Here the outline is perfectly
definite, and the man's resolution to persist in his evil course is
unmistakable. The broad band of orange in the centre shows very clearly
that although when the man loses he may curse the inconstancy of fate,
when he wins he attributes his success entirely to his own transcendent
genius. Probably he has invented some system to which he pins his faith,
and of which he is inordinately proud. But it will be noticed that on
each side of the orange comes a hard line of selfishness, and we see how
this in turn melts into avarice and becomes a mere animal greed of
possession, which is also so clearly expressed by the claw-like
extremities of the thought-form.

It is refreshing to turn from this gloomy picture to the wonderfully
different effect produced by the very same circumstances upon the mind
of the man who comprehends the facts of the case. It will be observed
that the two have no single emotion in common; in the former case all
was despondency and horror, while in this case we find none but the
highest and most beautiful sentiments. At the base of the thought-form
we find a full expression of deep sympathy, the lighter green indicating
appreciation of the suffering of the mourners and condolence with them,
while the band of deeper green shows the attitude of the thinker towards
the dead man himself. The deep rose-colour exhibits affection towards
both the dead and the living, while the upper part of the cone and the
stars which rise from it testify to the feeling aroused within the
thinker by the consideration of the subject of death, the blue
expressing its devotional aspect, while the violet shows the thought of,
and the power to respond to, a noble ideal, and the golden stars denote
the spiritual aspirations which its contemplation calls forth. The band
of clear yellow which is seen in the centre of this thought-form is very
significant, as indicating that the man's whole attitude is based upon
and prompted by his intellectual comprehension of the situation, and
this is also shown by the regularity of the arrangement of the colours
and the definiteness of the lines of demarcation between them.

The thinker was obviously a Theosophist, and it will be seen
that when he endeavours to think of the action of spirit upon matter he
instinctively follows the same line of symbolism as that depicted in the
well-known seal of the Society. Here we have an upward-pointing
triangle, signifying the threefold aspect of the Spirit, interlaced with
the downward-pointing triangle, which indicates matter with its three
inherent qualities. Usually we represent the upward triangle in white or
gold, and the downward-pointing one in some darker hue such as blue or
black, but it is noteworthy that in this case the thinker is so entirely
occupied with the intellectual endeavour, that no colour but yellow is
exhibited within the form. There is no room as yet for emotions of
devotion, of wonder, or of admiration; the idea which he wishes to
realise fills his mind entirely, to the exclusion of all else. Still the
definiteness of the outline as it stands out against its background of
rays shows that he has achieved a high measure of success.

Surely the study of these thought-forms should be a most impressive
object-lesson, since from it we may see both what to avoid and what to
cultivate, and may learn by degrees to appreciate how tremendous is our
responsibility for the exercise of this mighty power. Indeed it is
terribly true, as we said in the beginning, that thoughts are things,
and puissant things; and it behoves us to remember that every one of us
is generating them unceasingly night and day. See how great is the
happiness this knowledge brings to us, and how gloriously we can utilise
it when we know of some one in sorrow or in suffering. Often
circumstances arise which prevent us from giving physical help either by
word or deed, however much we may desire to do so; but there is no case
in which help by thought may not be given, and no case in which it can
fail to produce a definite result. It may often happen that at the
moment our friend may be too entirely occupied with his own suffering,
or perhaps too much excited, to receive and accept any suggestion from
without, but presently a time comes when our thought-form can penetrate
and discharge itself, and then assuredly our sympathy will produce its
due result. It is indeed true that the responsibility of using such a
power is great, yet we should not shrink from our duty on that account.
It is sadly true that there are many men who are unconsciously using
their thought-power chiefly for evil, yet this only makes it all the
more necessary that those of us who are beginning to understand life a
little should use it consciously, and use it for good. We have at our
command a never-failing criterion; we can never misuse this mighty power
of thought if we employ it always in unison with the great divine scheme
of evolution, and for the uplifting of our fellow-man.

Before closing this little treatise it will perhaps be of interest to
our readers to give a few examples of another type of forms unknown to
those who are confined to the physical senses as their means of
obtaining information. Many people are aware that sound is always
associated with colour--that when, for example, a musical note is
sounded, a flash of colour corresponding to it may be seen by those
whose finer senses are already to some extent developed. It seems not to
be so generally known that sound produces form as well as colour, and
that every piece of music leaves behind it an impression of this nature,
which persists for some considerable time, and is clearly visible and
intelligible to those who have eyes to see. Such a shape is perhaps not
technically a thought-form--unless indeed we take it, as we well may,
as the result of the thought of the composer expressed by means of the
skill of the musician through his instrument.

Some such forms are very striking and impressive, and naturally their
variety is infinite. Each class of music has its own type of form, and
the style of the composer shows as clearly in the form which his music
builds as a man's character shows in his handwriting. Other
possibilities of variation are introduced by the kind of instrument upon
which the music is performed, and also by the merits of the player. The
same piece of music if accurately played will always build the same
form, but that form will be enormously larger when it is played upon a
church organ or by a military band than when it is performed upon a
piano, and not only the size but also the texture of the resultant form
will be very different. There will also be a similar difference in
texture between the result of a piece of music played upon a violin and
the same piece executed upon the flute. Again, the excellence of the
performance has its effect, and there is a wonderful difference between
the radiant beauty of the form produced by the work of a true artist,
perfect alike in expression and execution, and the comparatively dull
and undistinguished-looking one which represents the effort of the
wooden and mechanical player. Anything like inaccuracy in rendering
naturally leaves a corresponding defect in the form, so that the exact
character of the performance shows itself just as clearly to the
clairvoyant spectator as it does to the auditor.

It is obvious that, if time and capacity permitted, hundreds of volumes
might be filled with drawings of the forms built by different pieces of
music under different conditions, so that the most that can be done
within any reasonable compass is to give a few examples of the leading
types. It has been decided for the purposes of this book to limit these
to three, to take types of music presenting readily recognisable
contrasts, and for the sake of simplicity in comparison to present them
all as they appeared when played upon the same instrument--a very fine
church organ. In each of our Plates the church shows as well as the
thought-form which towers far into the air above it; and it should be
remembered that though the drawings are on very different scales the
church is the same in all three cases, and consequently the relative
size of the sound-form can easily be calculated. The actual height of
the tower of the church is just under a hundred feet, so it will be seen
that the sound-form produced by a powerful organ is enormous in size.

Such forms remain as coherent erections for some considerable time--an
hour or two at least; and during all that time they are radiating forth
their characteristic vibrations in every direction, just as our
thought-forms do; and if the music be good, the effect of those
vibrations cannot but be uplifting to every man upon whose vehicles they
play. Thus the community owes a very real debt of gratitude to the
musician who pours forth such helpful influences, for he may affect for
good hundreds whom he never saw and will never know upon the physical
plane.

Let us endeavour now to give some clue to the meaning of all this, which
may well seem so bewildering to the novice, and to explain in some
measure how it comes into existence. It must be recollected that this is
a melody of simple character played once through, and that consequently
we can analyse the form in a way that would be quite impossible with a
larger and more complicated specimen. Yet even in this case we cannot
give all the details, as will presently be seen. Disregarding for the
moment the scalloped border, we have next within it an arrangement of
four lines of different colours running in the same direction, the
outermost being blue and the others crimson, yellow, and green
respectively. These lines are exceedingly irregular and crooked; in
fact, they each consist of a number of short lines at various levels
joined together perpendicularly. It seems that each of these short lines
represents a note of music, and that the irregularity of their
arrangement indicates the succession of these notes; so that each of
these crooked lines signifies the movement of one of the parts of the
melody, the four moving approximately together denoting the treble,
alto, tenor and bass respectively, though they do not necessarily appear
in that order in this astral form. Here it is necessary to interpolate a
still further explanation. Even with a melody so comparatively simple as
this there are tints and shades far too finely modulated to be
reproduced on any scale at all within our reach; therefore it must be
said that each of the short lines expressing a note has a colour of its
own, so that although as a whole that outer line gives an impression of
blueness, and the one next within it of carmine, each yet varies in
every inch of its length; so that what is shown is not a correct
reproduction of every tint, but only the general impression.

The two sets of four lines which seem to cross one another are caused by
two sections of the melody; the scalloped edging surrounding the whole
is the result of various flourishes and arpeggios, and the floating
crescents in the centre represent isolated or staccato chords. Naturally
the arpeggios are not wholly violet, for each loop has a different hue,
but on the whole they approach more nearly to that colour than to any
other. The height of this form above the tower of the church is probably
a little over a hundred feet; but since it also extends downwards
through the roof of the church its total perpendicular diameter may well
be about a hundred and fifty feet.

The whole form is seen projected against a coruscating background of
many colours, which is in reality a cloud surrounding it upon every
side, caused by the vibrations which are pouring out from it in all
directions.

A striking feature in this form is the radical difference between the
two types of music which occur in it, one producing the angular rocky
masses, and the other the rounded billowy clouds which lie between them.
Other _motifs_ are shown by the broad bands of blue and rose and green
which appear at the base of the bell, and the meandering lines of white
and yellow which quiver across them are probably produced by a rippling
arpeggio accompaniment.

In these three Plates only the form created directly by the
sound-vibrations has been drawn, though as seen by the clairvoyant it is
usually surrounded by many other minor forms, the result of the personal
feelings of the performer or of the emotions aroused among the audience
by the music. To recapitulate briefly: in Plate M we have a small and
comparatively simple form pourtrayed in considerable detail, something
of the effect of each note being given; in Plate G we have a more
elaborate form of very different character delineated with less detail,
since no attempt is made to render the separate notes, but only to show
how each chord expresses itself in form and colour; in Plate W we have a
still greater and richer form, in the depiction of which all detail is
avoided, in order that the full effect of the piece as a whole may be
approximately given.

To exist is not enough; we desire to live intelligently. But to live we
must know, and to know we must study; and here is a vast field open
before us, if we will only enter upon it and gather thence the fruits of
enlightenment. Let us, then, waste no more time in the dark dungeons of
ignorance, but come forth boldly into the glorious sunshine of that
divine wisdom which in these modern days men call Theosophy. 