
Whilom, when Salum was the lond of Qud,
Ther was highte Amus-an a sturdy Saad;
Of Caiafas was he lord magistrate,
Swich skilful arms dide earn him that estaat;
What with his wysdom and his hardynesse,
He conquered al the regne of Aldersesse;
And thurgh the eyr dashed undernethe his shroud,
And rafte the heddes of all thoos byg and proud;
And when the Coven quod by oon assent,
That starry Ptoh shal been to prison sente,
He leden all the wei and shette the dore,
While skerren men dide quake behinde his foore;
So buryen nought the Beren in a tumbe,
But fresen now to interrupt his dome;
And oon day resurrect to fighte agayn,
And maken sones of Salum all full fayn.

Welcome, Aristocrat, to a cybernetics learning nook. You are one
step closer to the Grand Unification. Ask a question.
 What are cybernetic implants?
 What are the benefits of cybernetics?
 What are the risks of cybernetics?
 How do I install a cybernetic implant?
 Goodbye.
Insightful question, Aristocrat. Cybernetic implants are the mind-machines that unify your biomatter with the heavier, choicer elements. With cybernetic implants, your ugly arms, eyes, and knowledge will be much prettier. Obviously, they are only available to the genetically pure.

Ask a question.

 What are cybernetic implants?
 What are the benefits of cybernetics?
 What are the risks of cybernetics?
 How do I install a cybernetic implant?
 Goodbye.
Aristocrat, your question was most finely uttered. Aside from the
various improvements each implant offers over its biomatter
counterpart, prosthetic limbs are also much sturdier and 75% less
likely to be severed.

Ask a question.

 What are cybernetic implants?
 What are the benefits of cybernetics?
 What are the risks of cybernetics?
 How do I install a cybernetic implant?
 Goodbye.
Aristocrat, your skepticism is perfect. When subject to
electromagnetic pulses, cybernetic limbs are deactivated and
anything worn on them is rendered useless. Similarly, data
indexer modules are deactivated when pulsed, and prosthetic
vision may become jumbled.

Ask a question.

 What are cybernetic implants?
 What are the benefits of cybernetics?
 What are the risks of cybernetics?
 How do I install a cybernetic implant?
 Goodbye.
You are correct, Aristocrat. Firstly, make sure there are credits
remaining on your cybernetics credit wedge. The installation of a
cybernetic implant costs one credit.

Then, you must propel yourself over to the appropriate nook. Make
sure the limb rack is loaded with the desired cybernetic limb, or
the ocular module deck is loaded with the desired ocular module,
or the data indexer module deck is loaded with the desired data
indexer module.


~Finally, interface with the cybernetics terminal. Then you will
have succeeded in doing the thing you wished to do.

Ask a question.

 What are cybernetic implants?
 What are the benefits of cybernetics?
 What are the risks of cybernetics?
 How do I install a cybernetic implant?
 Goodbye.

Gas is too misty.
Glass is too feeble.
Solids are too rocky.
Liquid crystals are not liquids!
Copolymers, decide what you are!
Bose-Einstein condensates are too wavy.
Superfluids are too unruly.
Fermionic condensates contain too many fermions.
Rydberg molecules are too excited.
Strange matter is too strange.
Plasma is too hot.
Quark-gluon plasma, contain your quarks!
Degenerate matter is too vulgar.
Loopfluids are too maddening.
String-net liquids, they are alright too, I suppose.
But Qo-Caco condensates are delicious.

KLANQ!

Did I do well, Newfather?
Newfather! Look!
Are you proud, Newfather?
Newfather!

Children, let's rejoice in the sovereignty of our Argent Fathers.
Praise Shekhinah, first among Fathers, who lights the path of wisdom.
Praise Dagon, the rhetorical, who speaks truth to chrome.
Praise Bel, shield-Father, who parts the swirling gas clouds.
Praise Carthax, silver-haired, who dashes down the well of gravity.
Praise Nisroch, ore-in-hand, who collides earth and star.
Praise Resheph, the Above, who purifies our mercury.
And blessed be the Kasaphescence, the muse who rouses their hearts.

Have you heard of the blessed baetyls, children?
They were created to oblige our desires.
O praise our Argent Fathers! Kindest and wisest of all beings.
A baetyl, you see, will answer your prayers.
It's in its circuitry to do so!
But the sin of time has corroded their wiring.
We are wanting in our service to our Fathers.
And so the baetyls are wanting in their service to us.
Answer not a baetyl who makes a request of you!
For it's a request most unholy in its corrosion.
Ignore it, and seek guidance from a priest!

Today, I recount the story of the Sacred Joining.
O, holy union! Blessed be thy name.
Our Argent Fathers, who roamed the azure void with inert hearts,
On a fluctuating whim converged upon Our Radiant Mother.
There, at the center of the universe, they beheld Her in awe.
Enchantment! It knows no other name!
There, they permeated her roiling membrane...
And exploded from within, colliding matter into machines...
Which passed through Her naked womb.
Rejoice! The Joining is through! Their union is consummated!

Today, children, I speak on the Edification.
O, hallowed act! Blessed be the metallurgy!
Our Argent Fathers, having hardened our plasmatic Mother,
Molded Her into Euclidean forms.
Bel sketched the parabola, Carthax sculpted the torus.
Shekhinah leveled the hills and capped them with chromatic domes.
Earth was quickened for our coming. Our home was ready.
The sin of time has corroded our endowment...
But worship eagerly, and the land shall shine again!

Welcome, children! Welcome to the Cathedral of Shekhinah, Our Argent Father!
Have you heard the Word of Shekhinah?
Do you bear his tidings in your heart?
Come, share this peaceful space.
Unburden yourself from the weight of your chrome guilt.
I am His voice, and I shall speak His word to you.
Here, here are our Argent Fathers!
They are the Great Sculptors. They wrought our metallic homes.
We are forever in their debt.
Repay that debt, lightseeker! Offer your chrome to Shekhinah!
Cleanse it of your guilt, your burdens. Throw it down the Sacred Well.
Let your possessions be reclaimed by the plasmatic core, and make a joyful noise unto Shekhinah.
He is your Argent Father! They are your Argent Fathers!
They have borne the weight of this Earth and a thousand others.
Theirs are the shoulders of titans! Theirs are the hearts of krakens!
And O! Their hearts are full!
'Twas not always so. Nay, in the waking dawn of days they roamed the universe with inert hearts.
As a dust urchin roams the winding canyons.
As you roam the caves of Qud, burdened by guilt and complexity!
Pay homage, lightseeker! Make an offering at the Well!
Fill your heart with the love of the Kasaphescence, as our Fathers once did!
In the name of Nisroch, honor thy Well!
In the name of Bel, rain your alloys down to the heart of the Stilt!
In the name of Dagon, speak chrome's prayer and unholster your lightrods!
In the name of Carthax, vault your artifacts into the sacred portal!
In the name of Resheph, cleanse them of your flesh!
In the name of Shekhinah, free them, and free yourself!
May the ground shake but the Six Day Stilt never tumble!
Come. Be with friends.
Share your life in simple peace.


Strap this around your temples. Stop yammering, you will be fine.
What could possibly go wrong?

      

Breathe deep the breath of gods, and die.

      

Black devils swing from starry masts,
beneath the Yawning Moon.

      

Today we shove off our frozen haunts, across bleak Arthax, and spy
for those inverted hills of chrome.

      

Who inhabits the colossal desert freehold of Nanru? The Gathered Men.
The fiefdoms of Odrum? The Kneeling Men.
The jungles of Yyp? The Breathless Men.
And the rust-caves of Qud? The Screaming Men.

      

Live and drink, friend. Now give me your water.

      

Moon and Sun; wisdom and will.

      

Praises due to the most high, thy Argent Father, me.

      

Look on my riches, ye Wealthy, and despair! (but do not touch)

      

Yes, I know the secrets of the circuitry mind. It's a flaming
wonder, telepath.

      

It burns!

      

Rule with a tungsten carbide fist.

      

Alas, I'd make a slumberling divine,
for in the dreaming dale art thou yet mine.

      

There it is in all of us -- shades of our elder selves. Within each
man, a goat. Within each goat, a man!

      

What is the nature of this thing we bludgeon? Or of the act itself?

      

To ply those silver hollows -- a spry adventurer's dream!

      

Don't heed the tale of every thirsty fool.

      

"Grrrraaaah."

      

May you bathe in blood. Not your own blood, sir. The blood of the
recast. I mean, the reclaimed. May you bathe in the blood of the
reclaimed.

      

May you bathe in the blood of the reclaimed.

      

Do those legs absorb water? Do they even synthesize cytokinins? I
didn't think so.

      

Upon hearing the news of the king's death, Uutut's political
adversaries cheered Wysterwort as a hero. They were soon disabused.

      

I have gazed into the hundred nine eyes of Shug'ruith the Burrower.

      

May the ground shake but the Six Day Stilt never tumble!

      

O, wise men! Keep thyselves assured wise,
and where a maid approacheth, shut thine eyes.

      

Nay, you should desire none of these things, for we are ravenous
fiends and oft succumb to fits of maddened fury.

      

Erecting a lodge is no paltry charge. Near all of my day is spent
chipping and stacking wood, and though you marvel at the lodge
itself, you may scowl at the labor that brings it forth.

      

In all these things you may with us partake, but take heed, for ours
are idle lives, and you may soon grow weary of them.

      

Klanq puff at you.

      

Feast upon the goat hearts!

      

Now Elohart and Belahind lie in a field of lah
because their fields got hungry and devoured the faundren raw.

      

You determine your worthiness! You steer it and shape it with 
your words and deeds! Now will you wallow in your abject limitations,
or will you face me with everything you have?

      

It is my dearest hope that one day I shall be known not as Angohind,
village bookworm... but Angohind, Master Detective.

      

Trees grow best beside the dead.

      


*The ink is faded beyond legibility*
  


A mimic crawled from the cold, starless reaches of Bethesda Susa to stretch itself across the prairie grass and warm its gummy scales in the sun of the noonday. Warm breezes blew through the lonely heath, and before long the mimic fell into a lazy sleep. Hours of restful slumber passed until it was stirred awake by the near rustling of shrubs. Its eyes opened upon the visages of three fork-horned gnus grazing on the prairie grass. Tresses of auburn hair streamed from their mammoth heads as they leisurely chewed the straw of the earth.

Allured by their languorous way and wanting for companionship, the mimic asked the gnus if he could tread among them, and graze of their pastures, and nap with them beneath the evening sun. In all these things you may with us partake, said one gnu, but, take heed, for ours are idle lives, and you may soon grow weary of them.

But the mimic joined them anyway. Day after day it filled its belly with the tall grass, and it cooled its lips upon the quiet banks of streams, and it surrendered its sluggish mind to the land of Nod before the light of day was extinguished. Until one morning, while the gnus slackly chewed their grass tendered by the early dew, the mimic, who had indeed grown weary of the beasts' idle habits, stole away down a babbling brook and into a thicket dark with shade.
      

For the remainder of the day the mimic followed the brook as it winded its way into the wood. As the last of the waxen light began to seep from the air, the mimic noticed several peculiar pilings of muddy sticks and logs up ahead in the middle of the prattling stream. A musker, its brown fur soaked and pressed against its small body, arranged twigs around the base of one of the piles. The mimic understood immediately; these were the musker's lodges, each one meticulously erected twig by twig. So impressed was the mimic with these well-built abodes and the diligence of the musker that it asked the rodent if it would share its home, and teach the mimic its craft, and abide the mimic as it built a lodge of its own. Erecting a lodge is no paltry charge, said the musker. Near all of my day is spent chipping and stacking wood, and though you marvel at the lodge itself, you may scowl at the labor that brings it forth.

But the mimic stayed with the musker anyway. And the following morning it awoke with the musker at dawn, and together they hewed branches from the Wine Cypresses with their teeth until the pall of evening was cast, and then they gathered all the rent wood and packed it together with mud drawn from the bed of the brook. At the break of each day they began anew, and they did not quit until long after sunset when the mimic could no longer spot the musker in the darkling thicket. Until one morning, while the musker wore its teeth on a rotting log, the mimic, who had
      

indeed grown weary of the labor charged to it by the musker, sneaked away by the babbling brook, out of the shady wood and into a valley quilted with the gnarled roots of brinestalk.

Again the mimic followed the stream through the hollow crook of the foothills until it spent its brackish waters into a vast lake. Here upon the bleached shore, the mimic gazed into the lake and marveled at a shoal of madpoles as they lashed through the briny water and pursued their fishy prey. The ferocity of these hunters, unrivaled in their agility and viciousness, enchanted the mimic, and so it asked the madpoles if it could dive into their waters, and race with them through the weeds, and feast upon the scaly flesh of the smaller fish. Nay, you should desire none of these things said one madpole, for we are ravenous fiends and oft succumb to fits of maddened fury.

But the mimic dived into the lake anyway. And as it splashed in the water, the madpoles, who sensed in their proximity living and nubile flesh, darted toward the mimic and tore it limb from limb.
      


Birds can't eat rice that wasn't planted.
    

Reared on the wisdom of our fairy tales, we're accustomed to feeling pity for the man who's transformed into a frog or finch, but seldom is it that we spare a thought for the artless beast who's transformed into a man and upon whom fate has surely played a much crueler trick.
    

If asked who's responsible for your misfortunes, blame birds. They neither care, nor can they muster much of a defense.
    

Let no fear in your heart grow so immense as the fear for large birds.
    

Birds ruin festivals and lift sieges.
    

Ol' Uri squinted and then nodded at the glowcrow's suggestion for a game of backgammon.

The boy started. But Uri! How can you dice with these vermin after one pecked out your eye?

Uri shrugged, Can't blame the crow. He was gonna peck, whether my eye was there or not.
    

The sighting of a crimson swift augurs the death of an aged water baron.

A silver thrush heralds a fossil harvest bountiful in chrome.

But the tongueless kagu... stay far from a tongueless kagu. Far and farther.
    

Some birds breathe fire. My meaning here is plain.
    

Atop the Spindle, where debtors and birds go.

Editor's note: this excerpt is published with permission from the notes of Barathrum the Old.

There's evidence in the arithmetic record that the study of formal systems reached a pernicious apex in the Long Before. Advancements made by mathematicians such as Russell, GÂ”del, Eisencruft, Atufu, Wheatgrass, and System Star contributed to the understanding of notions like undecidability, pointed regularism, and abyssalism. Upon reaching this minimal degree of mathematical maturity, equipped with sophisticated grammars, researchers set out to experiment with the limits of expressibility. They contrived bold research programs and galloped into the mathematical wood, unwitting of the dangers that brood there.

The record is even scarcer than usual, due to the efforts of successive generations to obfuscate the venture. As best as I can gather, at some point in the course of inquiry, a theorist from a mathematical seminary called the Cupola formulated a conjecture on the fragility of formal semantics. The conjecture ripened to a broader theory, out of which spawned a formal system called the penumbra calculus. In the few fragments of texts that predate the obfuscation, it's stated that, in the penumbra calculus, certain theorems are provable, but are falsified upon the completion of their proofs. As much as this result is at odds with the systems of thought I've encountered in my own inquiries, I find little reason to doubt the veracity of the authors. Nevertheless, it's certainly a peculiar property.

The Cupola theorist's results erupted into a grand investigation into the expressibility of the penumbra calculus. The conclusions were troubling. Pushing further, researchers constructed sister systems with alternate axioms. These systems were still more fragile, with the systems' inference rules themselves unraveling upon the completion of certain proofs.

Convinced that their discoveries were made possible by some idiosyncrasy of self-awareness, but synchronously fearful of the implications of their results, some schools of theorists engineered complex automated deduction systems to probe boundary theorems and launched them into neutron stars. The outcome is undocumented, but the result convinced theorists across the Coven to abandon research and blacklist anyone who studied the penumbra calculus and its derivative systems.

Peculiarly, support for the injunction was unanimous. Of note, even the spacefolder Ptoh agreed to abandon its investigation into the forbidden calculi from the reaches of its bleak star. Though the manner of its consent was not without controversy; to announce its accord, it inverted the color charge of quarks in a small region of space, causing a research station to collapse in on itself. Nonetheless, Ptoh's consent is testament to the degree of existential anxiety that could cause investigation into the penumbra calculus to go dark.
  








                why is deceit so accessible to me?

Why do some creatures seem to prefer when we assume their likenesses while others hate it? As a zoologist, this question has interested me for some time. To address it, I must first draw a distinction between 'natural mimicry', where certain humanoids have developed animal and plant likenesses on a biological level, and 'unnatural mimicry', enacted in the forms of clothing and other decorative adornments. As for the former, it appears all creatures exhibit kinship toward humanoids who look like them in the biological sense. The latter scenario is the interesting one.

It's tempting to draw the divide between mammals and non-mammals, but the truth is more complicated than this. It's true that the only creatures who seem to take outright offense at mimicry are mammals, but there are documented cases of mammals accepting the mimic. For example, fork-horned helms endear their wearers to both antelopes and goatfolk.

On the contrary, ape fur clothing and puma chitin vests inflame apes and cats, respectively. The important detail here is the context in which the clothing is made. Poachers hunt apes and pumas specifically for their prized fur and chitinous shells, and being reasonably social creatures, both species take offense at the flaunting of these trophies. Birds, on the other hand, seem to know that feather harvesting can be (although isn't always) done without proving fatal for the bird in question, though another hypothesis points to birds' specific appreciation of plumage regardless of context.

Unshelled reptiles seem to have few qualms with mimicry, perhaps believing the mimics to be truly reptile in part. Mollusks, trees, and insects all tend to identify with shell-bearers, leaf-donners, and firefly-symbiotes, respectively.

Without exception, however, all creatures seem to detest the practice of wearing the severed faces of their kin. Curious.
    




In the course of my readings and correspondances, I've observed two eminent threats to social equality. The first is the dissolution of social order via entropic forces. The fabric that holds us together frays and we fall apart, our most vulnerable first. The second is hegemonic control exerted by a few over a many. Here the fabric is knit tightly, but it's stitched into a ladder that narrows in ascension, and the majority are consigned to the bottom rung.

My first task is to ask how we can study these phenomena. In the physical sciences, we observe, measure, and experiment in order to formulate and then test hypotheses. Here, though, observations are sectional, data is spottier, and the systems at play are far more complex, their edges softer. Applying a 10x scope of rationality to a 1000x-scale structure would lead me to harmfully reductive conclusions. In fact, this very approach is employed by hegemonic powers to invent facile justifications for their rule.

So in complement, I borrow from other approaches and systems of thought. In particular, I'm interested in how artists examine these phenomena and challenge orthodoxy through metaphors. The art-historical record is fragmented but fraught with examples. One that stands out to me is the account of Red Sky, whose totally quetzal conceit was the first to whet my curiosity on the subject.

As the story goes, the entire court of an ancient sultan, including the sultan himself, was addicted to a psychotropic salt called Ipsis. Conspiring with a sorority of smugglers, an unnamed artist plundered the sultan's stock of Ipsis, molecularly altered it into a composite cellular structure, and launched it into low orbit. There it burned red in the sky, an affront to the sultan's sovereignty, for three years. Each time the sultan tried to disperse it through the means available to him, the structure, described in the record as a cellular automaton, rearranged itself and persisted. Quetzal.

There are plenty of modern examples too. Take Tau, who makes psionic mazes through the hexagonal crystals of the Moon Stair. I first formulated the entropy/hierarchy dichotomy while tracing the paths of two of her spirals that, at their intersections, burst into a bouquet of spacetime anomalies. I'd quetzal if I could meet Tau, but it may prove difficult as I hear she's a subentity of the sentient tree-city Chavvah.


Two groups typify the two poles of the entropy/hierarchy dichotomy: the Gyre wights and the Putus Templar. The ethos of the Gyre wights is chaotic self-indulgence, manic quickening (a mulish desire to see things fall apart faster), and a fetishization of history's dice rolls. They billow like an excited gas, smashing into each other as often as anyone else, and peeling bits of order from the communities they rancify. They are exponents of senseless violence.

The Templar on the other hand are enactors of extremely ordered violence. Their brutality has been codified into orthodoxy. Their ideological structures are anti-entropic but destructive and abhorrent. They seek to construct a rigidly hierarchical society with a slave caste on the bottom rung. Through rituals like the baptism in the blood of the reclaimed, they indoctrinate the privileged among their subjects. The rest of us are met only with force.
    




In the course of my readings and correspondances, I've observed two eminent threats to social equality. The first is the dissolution of social order via entropic forces. The fabric that holds us together frays and we fall apart, our most vulnerable first. The second is hegemonic control exerted by a few over a many. Here the fabric is knit tightly, but it's stitched into a ladder that narrows in ascension, and the majority are consigned to the bottom rung.

My first task is to ask how we can study these phenomena. In the physical sciences, we observe, measure, and experiment in order to formulate and then test hypotheses. Here, though, observations are sectional, data is spottier, and the systems at play are far more complex, their edges softer. Applying a 10x scope of rationality to a 1000x-scale structure would lead me to harmfully reductive conclusions. In fact, this very approach is employed by hegemonic powers to invent facile justifications for their rule.

So in complement, I borrow from other approaches and systems of thought. In particular, I'm interested in how artists examine these phenomena and challenge orthodoxy through metaphors. The art-historical record is fragmented but fraught with examples. One that stands out to me is the account of Red Sky, whose totally quetzal conceit was the first to whet my curiosity on the subject.

As the story goes, the entire court of an ancient sultan, including the sultan himself, was addicted to a psychotropic salt called Ipsis. Conspiring with a sorority of smugglers, an unnamed artist plundered the sultan's stock of Ipsis, molecularly altered it into a composite cellular structure, and launched it into low orbit. There it burned red in the sky, an affront to the sultan's sovereignty, for three years. Each time the sultan tried to disperse it through the means available to him, the structure, described in the record as a cellular automaton, rearranged itself and persisted. Quetzal.

There are plenty of modern examples too. Take Tau, who makes psionic mazes through the hexagonal crystals of the Moon Stair. I first formulated the entropy/hierarchy dichotomy while tracing the paths of two of her spirals that, at their intersections, burst into a bouquet of spacetime anomalies. I'd quetzal if I could meet Tau, but it may prove difficult as I hear she's a subentity of the sentient tree-city Chavvah.


Two groups typify the two poles of the entropy/hierarchy dichotomy: the Gyre wights and the Putus Templar. The ethos of the Gyre wights is chaotic self-indulgence, manic quickening (a mulish desire to see things fall apart faster), and a fetishization of history's dice rolls. They billow like an excited gas, smashing into each other as often as anyone else, and peeling bits of order from the communities they rancify. They are exponents of senseless violence.

The Templar on the other hand are enactors of extremely ordered violence. Their brutality has been codified into orthodoxy. Their ideological structures are anti-entropic but destructive and abhorrent. They seek to construct a rigidly hierarchical society with a slave caste on the bottom rung. Through rituals like the baptism in the blood of the reclaimed, they indoctrinate the privileged among their subjects. The rest of us are met only with force.

An instructive discussion with a screw-sorting friend has altered my viewing plane. They relayed a dream of the Rainbow Wood, and through quite vivid metaphorization wrought a compelling argument of death as the ladder to life, which among other consequences softened my position on the Gyre wight project, if such a thing can be titled. Where am I at with it all now? I do not know. But my schema of Two Poles now feels excessive and reductive. I leave the original language in this edition for consideration.



I'd like to reproduce a perspective I recently shared with a friend, a lamplighter by trade and an artist too, who shied away from a typography tournament at the festival of Ut yara Ux because of a fear in her heart. She suffers from the malady of the mimic, the all too common sickness that makes us feel like we're performing our lives instead of inhabiting them, that we don't belong next to those who've won success nor do we deserve those same successes when we've won them ourselves. I've counted myself among its victims in the past, and occasionally I still do.

First, indulge me for short while. On a shelf in my workshop sits a simple contraption called a morphoscope. It's comprised of two parts: an armature of pliable aluminum wire and a rotary base. Its purpose is to communicate a three-dimensional form from a two-dimensional viewing plane. The armature can be contorted such that, when viewed in its still state, it looks like a jumbled mess of wire, but when viewed in rotation it assumes the familiar form of an object, such as a bird or urshiib countenance.

What's this have to do with the malady of the mimic? To answer that, we must deconstruct the malady. Let's ask: what is it to be a mimic, to appear as a thing but feel like another? Essentially it's a phenomenon of semantic distance, a sensation of the space between what we perceive in others and what we perceive about ourselves. We've constructed a representation of what, in the case of my friend, a proper artist and typographer looks like. Why do we have such trouble squaring that representation with our own image?

The answer lies in the richness of our self-perception. We see ourselves in stereo, our wire armature plied by our experiences, our self-image formed by rotating it about the axis of time. What we call 'artist' or 'typographer' is just a jumbled mess of wire, an unfamiliar pattern we give a name to in absence of the context of life's motion. Were we to see our peers in rotation, gain perspective on their doubts, their fears, their pain, the jumbled mess of a pattern would disappear into the familiar form of a person. And conversely, had we the capacity to freeze our own motion, to see ourselves absent of the context of our doubt, fear, and pain, we'd see an artist and a typographer just the same.

There's a fable about a mimic who seeks to belong but never does, whose ambition ultimately leads to a grisly fate. Its moral serves an ideological function: to keep us from belonging where we already do. So let me say to you now: belong, friend. We wait for you joyously.
    




I come from the west. My parents sold me into slavery as a babe, though the practice had been formally abolished in Perth years earlier. As a boy I cut my teeth on the reefs of the Shore of Songs, and lulled the Pale Sea to sleep with many a hymn, that she might return our sailors from the Black Stair unscathed. How the melodies whisked inside my skull even then. I was given no name at birth, but the sailors called me Catu.

At five and ten years I ran away. On Ettinspine I roosted with an eremite who ushered me into manhood. I learned to hunt, and laugh, and dream. In time I came to know of the Free City and the ingress afforded my kind. I shoved off from my stony nook, and trekked to their high gate, and settled there, though I preferred to sup with the anglers and other low folk.

In a sun-warmed pool under the rampart the Free Seer first noticed me. The slant of his neck from where he watched on the parapet presaged my movements, I still recall. I stood from my bath and shamefully padded to my discarded vest, but stopped. I saw him from that distance, his eyes tucked deep into his shorn dome, his frock as inert as a statue's, and I felt no more shame.

Under his tutelage I rose to prominence in his court. I stood by his side as he treated with the tuyuldars of Odrum, as he plotted against the southern freeholds. When a traitorous canter slipped poison into his cup, I smashed it from his hands and sundered the quisling's mind. That night, in the hour of the Beetle Moon, he introduced me to the mirth of an assembled mind. Together with the other canters we Joined, and he named me Mirthful, and raised me unto his honor guard. I would be dispossessed of it in under a year.

But I must pause now. The Cant loudens, and the Elder nears. I vow to conclude my story if I still draw breath, and if I am free.




It is dusk. I sit on the bank of the River Svy, but no fire warms my bones. The risk of drawing moon-doting beasts is too great, and any aggregation of minds is sure to attract the attention of the Elder. Instead, I write by a flame kindled on my thumb.

I left off at being named Mirthful in the Hall of the Free Seer. No honor is higher for a canter of Oth. For months I trained with my masked compatriots beneath the Hall, where our clay cisterns stored the freshwater that would later haunt my dreams. In the spring a letter arrived from the Angler King. He sought a treaty with the Free Seer and invited us to a neutral council on the doorstep of Ibunudr, arbitrated by the tuyuldar of Doria. After much preparation we set out, rowing our sketties beyond the Bowl of Iris and to the frosty shores of that far tundra.

Over the course of the journey the Free Seer's disposition soured. He withdrew from the counsel of the Mirthful, even my own, and spent the better part of the wintry trek alone in his tent. At first I attributed his mood to the fragility of our diplomatic high ground, but I soon learned the true tack.

We arrived at the camp on Ibunudr on the summer solstice. The twin banners of Athenreach and Doria thrashed in the wind, and the hymns of the Eustace-Sutta carried. I remember smiling at the throaty crooning of their priests. As we studied the campground from a hillock, as the Free Seer ambled up to my side, I saw the jewel of the Hanging Hills, Nisramet, the Angler King's wife, she who cemented the peace between her father's fiefdoms and the Angler King's freehold. I saw her, and I immediately knew my own treachery. The Free Seer's gaze was acknowledgement enough.



I've arrived at Kyakukya. Kind Nuntu shares his hut with me, offers me smoked mushroom, and asks nothing in return. I write these words at his desk, and though he lusts for knowledge himself, he leaves me be to chronicle my past.

The campaign back toward Oth was grim. I awaited my fate at the Free Seer's hands, though I anticipated being given the dignity of first returning to the Hall and my home. I was not afforded so much. One dismal night, under the Beetle Moon, I was accosted in my tent by my masked brothers. To my bewilderment, the Stithening had come already. How had the Free Seer acquired the cherrydotters? Had he bargained for them at Ibunudr, or had he possessed them all along? To this day I do not know.

I remember little of the Stithening outside the beating of my own heart high in my ears. I passed out, and when I awoke next morning, the cavalcade had vanished. Only a moment did my recognition last before the chanting in my head took hold. I had heard it before, of course. All my life, in fact. It was the chanting that I weaved my melodies around on the shores of Perth as a small boy. Now, though, it was as if a single, distant canter had summoned a thousand of his kin, and they each summoned a thousand of their own. I wept, then I screamed, then I tore the hair from my head. The chant animated my bones more surely than my volition ever had. East and south, it urged. East and south. East and south. Toward Qud.

My recollection of the voyage to the Great Salt Desert is fractured and fitful. I grew sicker by the day, but the chant grew louder, and so quickened the force that compelled me. Surely I would die once I reached the moistureless plains of Moghra'yi, presumably as had my predecessors before me. Finally, I did reach them, where a salt-churned rivulet dried under a golden arch. The arch seems a thing born of my dementia but that I recall it so vividly, and that I know it's the least of the secrets kept by Moghra'yi.




I edge closer to the grove of fungi and its preposterous promise. Are the whispers true? Could it be all so simple? I can feel the moistness of the Eater's flesh on my lips, though the memory is surely another's. If salvation awaits me, then I promise to take it, whether or not I deserve it. Tonight, though, the jungle shrouds me. I sit under a chrome belfry, a leech kneading at my skin. I feel no compulsion to bar its work. The companionship is welcome.

Now to awaken the past once more. Moghra'yi. O, how the dromads know!

How did I survive the Great Desert? I cannot say for sure. I owe something to the songs I sang at Perth, to the falconry I learned on Ettinspine, to the honing of my sinew under Oth. The fractured dream that was my voyage offers little elucidation. But I do remember chewing salt, and summoning gusts of wind to suck the moisture out of the dead air.

Of all the riven memories that churn in my head, Moghra'yi only accounts for a coherent three. The first is a vision of ruin at the fabled Kubrisyeti, the seat of the Wrathchild empire. Stretched across the alabaster plain were the last of their wicked structures, toppled effigies of the manscorpions themselves. I reposed there, against my will and only out of exhaustion. Fixated on the night sky in fear and fatigue, I heard the echoes of a great saltback's steps. Even those gargantuans know to avoid the place.

The second memory is the presence of the giants. Colossal skeletons in the forms of humanoids litter the desert. I had heard the accounts before, and indeed some of the specimens extend as far north as Odrum. Their history is wholly unknown to us or anyone else, but their bones provide some of the only shade on the salt pans, and so they grew to be welcome sights. So it was with horror that I discerned a truth, one night, while tucked into the rib cage of one of three cadavers in a small proximity. You see, all the carcasses shared a commonality: their orientation. East and south. East and south.

The third memory is the rust. Rusted hulls and rusted spires. It took me weeks to realize what I beheld. For all my boyhood was rife with sketties and ships, but none were of this size. I envisioned what the past must have looked like, as little sense as it made to me. Moghra'yi as a vast sea, and monstrous vessels mounting its waves. Markings and etches on their hulls had no resonance for me then. Later, though, I recognized the figure of the Spindle, and I glimpsed the importance it held for these sea-faring Eaters.

When I lurched to the ground and was righted by a brown-skinned man with a knife, a glowing cat at his feet, I knew it was a dream. It must be a dream.




I owe my life to snapjaws. In my haste to reach the fungal grove, I misstepped. My wandering and buoyant mind blinded itself to the presence of a chosen one. She neared me, set on enveloping me back into the fold, but she was intercepted by snapjaws. For what purpose did they intercede I do not know, but they have my thanks. So must they have the Elder's ire.

I come now to Qud and the Seekers of the Sightless Way. The chanting compounded in my skull into a final ecstasy, wherein I joined an aggregate mind the likes of which I hadn't fathomed. I was primed for it, though. From my first joining on Ettinspine all those years ago, to the Rite of Mirth chaperoned by the Free Seer, I knew that sight guides us no more than salt does. There is ecstasy in the aggregate, indeed, and the Elder is as powerful a center as I've known. But a center is it still, and where there is a center, there is a hierarchy.

Which piece of my past endowed me with the wisdom to see through the ruse? Was it the boyhood memory of crashing waves on the Shore of Songs, echoed later in my vision at Moghra'yi? Was it the jealousy in the eyes of the Free Seer at Ibunudr? Or was it a mere wrinkle in the mass mind, owing nothing to my own struggle? I cannot say, but while the other canters piped their songs to weaken the Elder's prison, unknowing thralls to a greater mind, I escaped.

The Elder... no, Ptoh. I write the name in defiance of my captivity even at the risk it incurs. Ptoh knew nothing at first, but my absence dawned in time. The continuity was broken, and Ptoh sent agents to seize me. Even now, they near.



It is too late. Though I sit near a stream of primordial soup, though clouds of spores surround me, it is too late. My invocation of Ptoh's name fixed my location and trajectory. The Eater's flesh is mine now, but the Chosen will be here in corporeal form too soon. Could I have lived outside the aggregate for very long, in any case? I do not know. The solitude wears on me as much as my flight. I've one last sundering to perform. A sundering. A memory of a distant life, a lost dream, takes hold. I sunder the mind of a foe to protect a lover.
    



It is often said the cure of a plague is also the cause. While there is truth to the maxim, I've found it to be well supplemented by a broader and systematic approach to treatment. The following is a record of known afflictions, their symptoms and remedies, which I have compiled from the logs and personal notes I authored during the course of my forty-year tenure as physician and apothecary to the farmstead of Kardis. Abbott Urium of the neighboring Monastery of the Illustrious Heart of Chrome has agreed to instruct the monks of the scriptorium to reproduce this text for posterity; the reader who finds use in these notes is indebted to him.




      


The leg bones of patients stricken with this disease of unknown origin remain in a state of perpetual calcification. The afflicted patient will complain of aching joints and restricted movement as the rate of bone growth accelerates. Once the disease is fully blown, the bones will harden and grow at an advanced rate. The untreated patient will suffer increasingly restricted movement until the bones are fused together at the hip, knee, and ankle joints and the patient is rendered immobile. This process takes between one and two weeks.

Ironshank may be suppressed in its early stages with common remedies such as yuckwheat or honey, though the more potent elixirs of the Eaters are preferable where available. Once the disease is fully blown and the patient begins to lose mobility, gel (made from desalinated amoeba slime) is the only effective treatment I've discovered. The patient should be administered a draught composed of one dram of gel and one dram of asphalt every day until the leg joints regain their full range of motion.
      


Carried by the adiyy bug of the Spindle-shaded musa grove, monochrome is an affliction of the eye that renders the diseased incapable of seeing color. Onset is characterized by the blurring of vision over several days, followed by the complete loss of chromatic perception.

Honey and yuckwheat are sometimes effective at halting the color blindness. To cure the affliction once color sight is lost, however, the patient must ingest one dram of unadulterated salt and then immediately subject themselves to the detonation of a flashbang grenade. Somehow the vision scrambling effect resets the victim's perceptors, and color sight is restored.



This is probably the most bizarre of the afflictions I've encountered in my forty years as a physician. Moon King Fever is a brain disorder characterized by an unwavering belief that the victim is the king of the moon. All twelve of the afflicted patients who I've treated experienced identical symptoms: burning fever and accompanying fever dreams of the moon followed by hyper-emotive facial expressions, delusions of grandeur, and a disregard for self-preservation.

There are no known treatments for Moon King Fever. The prognosis is madness followed by glorious feat-induced death.



Glotrot is an affliction characterized by necrosis of the tongue. Judging by evidence gathered from my patients' accounts, I place the disease's origin within the cavern of Golgotha where victims most likely contracted it from the putrid spawn of Agolgot.
  
The afflicted patient will complain of soreness in the throat as the tongue tissue begins to swell. Within a week's span, the muscle will soften and start to decompose. The patient will experience severe pain while ingesting food or drink and may agitate the last of the raw, living tissue, causing the mouth to bleed. Over the following few days, the tongue will rot in its entirety, rendering the patient incapable of speech.

Common remedies (yuckwheat, honey) are sometimes effective in reversing the necrosis if they are administered in its early stages. Once the tongue has completely rotted away, only the scarce ubernostrum tonic will cause it to regrow. However, simply injecting the tonic will merely regrow the tongue, which will proceed to rot away once more. The patient must first ingest a potion called the Flaming Ick -- one part blood, one part wine, three parts sap, and drank from a flaming vessel. Once the patient's mouth is purged of the disease in this manner, the ubernostrum tonic may be administered.



I've observed several varieties of symbiotic fungal infections on patients who've come into contact with the spores of brooding puffers. Mercifully, puffers seem to thrive only in the dense fungal colony of the eastern jungle and the occasional fungus-rich biome. Characteristics of each infection differ, but all types of symbiotic fungi colonize a region of the afflicted's body. The colonization takes two to three days to complete, during which time the patient may report itchiness of the skin. The deformation and sensitivity that result once the full affliction takes hold tends to prevent the donning of clothing in the afflicted region.



In cases of fickle gill, infection culminates in the formation of fleshy, spore-bearing gills in the colonized region. Upon certain stresses, typically under bodily harm, the gills flex and release a cloud of spores, numbering in the thousands, that shower onto adjacent parties, ostensibly protecting their host. The rained spores in turn colonize their new hosts, rating this disease among the most contagious.



The appearance of frosty, luminous nodules characterize this colony. As is always the case with symbiosis, the fungus does seem to 'benefit' its carrier by coarsening the skin and providing some protection from the elements. Some patients report gratification in consuming the edible hoarshrooms that sprout from their skin; accounts vary according to the personalities of the afflicted.



The colony of filamentous vermillion seems to incubate a living tissue that resembles human lips. The lips pair together to form tiny 'mouths' that tesselate the infected region. A saliva-like sputum gets frothed up from the dermal base and forms into bubbles that pop when the lips spasm and purse. Each pair of spasming lips flagellate each other to produce a sort of speech-like mumble. Even more curiously, the mumbling across the cluster of mouths occasionally coheres into intelligible words and phrases, suggesting the colony is able to reproduce sounds from a collective memory.



This species of fungus secretes a fatty wax that dries into a protective cast. While it insulates the encased appendage from physical harm and electrical current, patients report sluggish response times, and the infected flesh is susceptible to liquification when heated. In fact, habitual body heat tends to melt the inner layers of the cast, trapping a few drams of molten wax between the skin and casing. Occasionally, this milky broth leaks out of the cast and onto the ground.

The treatment regimen for all fungal infections is the same. First, an anti-fungal cream must be concocted from gel (desalinated slime) and primordial soup. The patient then consumes a raw knollworm corpse to stimulate intestinal immunity. Within two hours of ingesting the corpse, use a spray bottle to apply one dram of the concoction to the infected skin.


Now I confer upon myself sovereignty over the artifice of language, that
the Other may possess sight of the path along which I lead my thralls.

Toward Amaranth! O Deathless City! Whence my cloven-hoofed children dream
themselves into being.

Hear Mamon! Their beneficent Father! He who is wrought of his own dream
stuff.

Amaranthine Mamon. Amaranthine Father. Amaranthine dream.

inscrutable ramblings
inscrutable ramblings
inscrutable ramblings
inscrutable ramblings

Yet feast upon the goat hearts!
      




Webs everywhere. Sound of rushing water below. Impressions of tiny claws on shale floor. Extinct miniature cave-dwelling bird? No jasper.




Spider bite! Dropped half my wafers in mud. Ol' Uri laughing?. No jasper.




Another pair of moccasins ruined. River is close. Dug myself to exhaustion. No jasper.


Soaking wet. Empty chest. Not my day. No jasper.






Lost! Crab eggs? Bizarre scuttling noise. NO JASPER.


Frivolous Lives: Being the Foremost Catalogue of Humanoid Kings by the Baccata Yewtarch, Volume I


This record draws upon the notes and accounts of the constituents of the Consortium of Phyta, hearsay from those who observed the futile lives of the humanoid kings, and personal anecdotes of the kings themselves, who in their struggles to remain relevant beyond their seedling-like lifespans managed to record some useful data.

As a matter of convention, I date the reigns of the humanoid kings according to their chronological distance from an event of paramount historical significance, namely the publication of these volumes. Accordingly, take my suffixal notation rendered after the parenthetical dates to signify their occurrence prior [to] publication.


During this period of humanoid prehistory the greater Girsh entities roamed Outer Qud and humanoid communities were largely isolated. Consortium records predate the end of the Scattered Age; however, they are disparate in their assertions and ultimately unreliable; the period's dearth of scholarship is
      

likely a result of traditions derived from Hegelrut's contempt of writing implements.


The first humanoid to successfully unite the farmsteads of western Qud was Abram, called the Sower. According to the lore of Abram's descendants (of which the Consortium has chosen not to disabuse them), Abram's call to arms rallied his kinsmen and under his sovereignty they drove the greater Girsh entities beneath the surface to the depths of Inner Qud at which they now roost. To follow were two or three decades of jubilation and prosperity that lasted until the day Abram, disillusioned by the growing tumult among his sons on the question of succession, famously beat his sword into a ploughshare and dissolved his kingdom.


The years that followed Abram's dissolution were marked by fear, turmoil, and bloodshed. His sons fought fiercely for control of the farmsteads while water barons conspired against them and in some cases staked their own claims. At last, sometime between 970 and 960 PP, Abram acknowledged the futility of the prospect of peace without his providence and returned to the throne with his sword in hand.
      


Unfortunately for the reluctant king, his second reign proved to be much less auspicious than his first. The jealousy among his sons never died, and what little record remains of the period indicates Abram spent the remaining years of his life in anguish over what his rulership had wreaked.


Having never publicly named an heir, Abram left his kingdom to the devices of his scheming sons. No consensus was reached among them, and for eight years the brothers warred until Cairo I was able to consolidate power and wrest his father's kingdom from the grips of his brothers' lifeless hands.


For all his disinterest in brotherly love, Cairo I was an able statesman and an effectual leader. During the course of his twenty-one year reign, he repelled the mountaineering barbarians who raided Qud from the north, established trade relations with Chavvah, the Tree of Life at Eyn Roj, and renovated two of southern Qud's shimmering archways. He died of old age in 925 PP and bestowed the throne to his son Cairo II.
      


Cairo II proved to be nothing like his prodigious father. In the course of six short years he despoiled his grandfather's kingdom. Ignoring the advice of his counselors, he insisted on levying harsh taxes on a young Barathrum and his disciple tinkers, and in short order the urshiib severed their ties with the Kingdom of Qud and left Cairo with no access to the artifacts he needed to protect his people. Furthermore, he was a notorious wastrel; he spent the entire year of 922 PP in a freshwater bath which he ordered his servants to continuously refill. Lastly and most egregiously, he incurred the disfavor of the Consortium by humiliating two of their dignitaries who were visitors of his court by commanding they pose still for several hours while he hosted his autumnal feast. Mercifully, he was assassinated in 919 PP.


Following the disaster of Cairo II's reign, Qud plunged into one of several dark periods of disjointed rule. From what little data of the period survives, we note that life proceeded much as it had in the days before Abram; moisture farmers sucked the land dry, landlords protected their serfs, and madcaps hunted their fortunes in the innumerable chrome corridors of Inner Qud.
      


Given the circumstances of Cairo II's reign and the decades of tribulation that followed, we are able to form some understanding of why the humanoid denizens of Qud would rally behind a robot king. Little is known of K4K5's life prior to his regal ascension, but it is believed to have emerged from the cavern called Siloam sometime during the dark age. In its humanoid subjects we suppose it found a purpose to its theretofore capricious life, and in it his subjects found a kind and affable ruler who unified farmsteads and mining settlements that had been estranged for thirty years. In the end, though, even K4K5 could not escape mortality, and in 873 PP it succumbed to a severe bout of flash rusting. Before it perished, however, it named its pupil, Mehmet of the Hills, as its heir. Mehmet's first order of business upon taking the throne was to honor his predecessor with the commission of a monumental statue that still stands today in the northeastern jungles near the Mount of Olives.


Possessed of the indefatigable patience of his mentor and a singular yearning to improve the lives of his subjects, Mehmet I successfully preserved order in Qud for nearly thirty years. He benefited from an auspicious lull in the reproductive activities of the Girsh entities,
      

and he wasted none of the time fate had given him. From the years of 871 to 866 PP he dispatched envoys into the great salt desert Moghra'yi. Hundreds of Qudians perished at the hands of the nomadic tribes, expired to heat exhaustion, or met fates worse still, until in 866 PP an unnamed emissary made contact with the dromad merchants. The dromads, who had believed the inhabitants of Qud too barbaric for trade and had dismissed the region for centuries, began at last to include Qud in their world-spanning treks (These visits stopped abruptly when Mehmet's successor Uutut the Boorish slaughtered the first dromad caravan to arrive after the onset of his reign, but the precedent for trade relations was established nonetheless).

Domestically, Mehmet I set out to construct the first Library of Qud in the far southern jungles, but his efforts were cut short by the barbarian invasions of 850 PP. The peaceable king spent the remaining six years of his life repelling the incursions of the barbarians over the Mount of Olives, but he was not skilled in the arts of war, and in 844 PP the barbarian king Uutut sacked Morshershire, beheaded Mehmet, and seized the throne.
      


Following the regicide of Mehmet I, Qud inherited its first foreign-born ruler. It is the belief of some that nurture is the mother of nicety, and that endowed with the proper tutelage anyone may come to cultivate the self-possession of a rightful gentleman. In Uutut the Boorish we observe this hypothesis disproved. Upon settling in to his recently-razed capital of Morshershire, Uutut installed several local aristocrats to positions of power in his court. By year's end, he had slaughtered them all. At every turn in the labyrinth of diplomacy in which Uutut had found himself, he chose instead to smash through the walls. This doctrine of carnage actually served Uutut well for several years; the blue-blooded water barons were terrified of him, the kings of his rival barbarian clans were satisfied with pillaging the outskirts of Qud, and even the Sons of Man kept to themselves in their stronghold at Oudin. For all the boorish king's might, however, he was not immune to poisonous gas. It was with this knowledge that Wysterwort DCXLVIII was able to win the throne and inaugurate the first (and only) plant dynasty in Qud's history.
      


Upon hearing the news of the king's death, Uutut's political adversaries cheered Wysterwort as a hero. They were soon disabused. Whereas Uutut was known to vanquish anyone who opposed him, Wysterwort did not bother to reckon that distinction. For those that did survive the plant-king's fickle expulsions of lethal gas, they found themselves subjects to rather odd rules of law. For instance, in 837 PP, Wysterwort mandated that humanoid babes were to be nursed with wine instead of their mothers' milk. In the following year, he commissioned a minstrel to author a musical play. The plant-king was so delighted with the result that he commanded all of his subjects to learn the various roles of the play and to alternate performing it nightly in their respective villages. For the five years of his reign, Wysterwort's eccentricities were humored amidst a backdrop of famine, disease, and poisonous gas. In the winter of 833 PP and for reasons undocumented, the accomplished weed fell into a deep depression, and before the winter solstice had passed he strangled himself. He was survived by his heir Wysterwort DCXLIX.
      

Wysterwort averred that history would judge him kindly, and it has. While it is true that more people perished under his reign than any of his predecessors' and that he accomplished very little of lasting historical value, one can only fathom how unpleasant it must be to live in such close proximity to so many humanoids for so long. Indeed, it is a wonder the poor king did not take his own life sooner.


Wysterwort DCXLIX possessed no interest in ruling over a humanoid kingdom, and he abdicated mere hours after inheriting the throne.


This sixty year period of anarchy was particularly arduous for the denizens of the rust caves. The wake of the Wysterwort dynasty had left no humanoid fit for rule, Qud was plagued for decades with torrential glass storms fed by the westerly winds out of Moghra'yi, and girshlings poured forth in enormous numbers from the lairs of their mothers. It wasn't until Abram II, like his namesake before him, roused his countrymen and set out to rebuff the girshling throng in 787 PP that Qud was reunited as one. With the story of that ill-fated king does the second volume of my chronicle begin.
      


Across Moghra'yi: Being the Foremost Catalogue of Strange Civilizations beyond the Great Salt Desert by the Baccata Yewtarch, Volume I: The Sunderlies


Obviously and unfortunately, no primary sources are available from these distant lands. Much of this record draws upon the accounts given by fungi who crossed Moghra'yi on the backs of dromad merchants.

As a matter of convention, I date all events according to their chronological distance from an event of paramount historical significance, namely the publication of these volumes. Accordingly, note that the events' parenthetical dates signify their occurrence prior [to] publication.


The Sunderlies are a labyrinthine complex of towering "sundered" bluffs that lie to the northwest of Moghra'yi, the Great Salt Desert and to the southwest of the Ibul ice sheet. Their canyon walls are dotted with innumerable cave-mouths, giving the impression of colossal, earthly honeycombs. These caves were the haunts of ancient peoples as their civilizations followed the receding waterline down into the emptied
      

gorges. Now through those gorges course only shallow rivers. Over the last two hundred years, clans of cave-dwellers have begun to gather in greater numbers among the comb-caves and form city-states called freeholds.


The Pale Sea's waves break on the western bluffs of the Sunderlies at the Shore of Songs, named for the melodies the comb-caves whistle when the sea winds blow through. They stretch north and east, climbing skyward along the ice-capped Aeschlays. Eastward, they recess toward Whitecomb at the Bowl of Iris -- the bridge to Aegansteppe. To the far east they rise again toward the Hanging Hills and the land called Odrum. The comb-canyons dry up as they course southward into the Great Salt Desert, though the most westerly ones spend their water into the Pale Marshes.

Several millennia ago, the migrants who followed the receding waterline down into the to-be desert basin were largely wiped out by the onset of the ice age. Most of the clans perished; those that survived were driven deep into the lightless comb-caves where the last vestiges of technology warmed the sheltered earth. The Sunderlies were devoid of higher life during the coldest centuries -- giant, ice-sheathed worms
      

coursed their way through the frozen caves and woolly rocs made their nests atop the snowy peaks, but what remained of man did not emerge for thousands of years.

A millennium after the last people were driven into the earth, at the height of the Wrathchild empire in the great southern salt desert called Moghra'yi, a race of beings known as the Ophaedians migrated north from their desert city to the Sunderlies. There they escaped the reach of the kuyeti, the monstrous man-scorpions whose empire spanned the great desert. The Ophaedians were gifted with the ability of goldworking, and during the course of their four-thousand year reign over the Sunderlies they wrought hundreds of spires and bridges of solid gold. Around 1800P they disappeared suddenly, perhaps as a result of the warming climate to which they had lost their adaptation from their years spent in the colder northlands. As the earth warmed, a primitive people emerged from their cavern recesses. They climbed the snowy combs and settled the superior caves. According to their myths, these new folk made oaths to the nameless gods who had warmed the earth for their children's return to the surface. So were born the clans of true folk.
      



As the myth goes, the clans of true folk are those families that can trace their lineages back to patriarchs who swore oaths and remained loyal to the Sunderlies' nameless gods. There were those who betrayed the nameless, forging pacts with strange, foreign gods in exchange for gifts of power. According to the true folk, those traitors and their cursed offspring, aroused by their greed, made war upon each other until their families were sundered and driven apart. All the while the true folk remained stalwart in their holds, readying their might to serve vengeance to the traitors. So began a long history of slavery. Over time several of the children of the treacherous became remorseful, and the relationship between master and slave matured to something akin to master and servant. To the present several of the "gifted" (or "accursed") tribes remain indentured to the clans of true folk.





The Soturs, one of the eldest and largest of the eight clans, have dwelled in
      

the comb-caves along the Shore of Songs for a thousand years. They claim descendancy from Sotur Stonehands, who woke thirsty from his cave one morning and beat his fists against the earth until the gods summoned the Pale Sea to appease him. For hundreds of years they have warred with Clan Rowen, various mutant tribes, and the slugmounters of the southern marshlands, though recently their feud with Rowen was put to an end by the founding of Perth. Clan Sotur's sigil is a sundered mountain.



Clan Plutarch descended into the Sunderlies from the frozen Aeschlays a millennium ago. Their patriarch was Plutarch Icewreath, who was said to be trapped in a glacier for thousands of years before the gods unfroze him so that he might spread his progeny and rule. For a thousand years the ice kings have ruled the northern Sunderlies from Highwreath Hall. Clan Plutarch's sigil is a blue crown wrought from shards of ice on a white field.



The Lecrays hail from the fertile Bowl of Iris along the northen reaches of
      

the Sunderlies. They trace their lineage back to Lecray of Iris, called Lecray the Bountiful or Lecray the Virile. Clan Lecray maintains that they are the purest of the clans of true folk as the Bowl of Iris was the last of the fertile lands untouched by the servants of foreign gods. Unsurprisingly, this notion is disputed by the other great clans. Clan Lecray's sigil is a horn of plenty on a verdant green field.





The people of Clan Karst are thought to have migrated to the western Sunderlies from the Icepyres adjoining Fuming God Sea. Little is known of their progenitor, Karst, but that he appeared on the Shore of Songs still smoldering some four hundred years ago. Thusly, Clan Karst's sigil is the smoldering silhouette of a man.



Clan Rowen claims descendancy from Rowen Godfear, the brother of a Sotur king. The pious Rowen broke away from Clan Sotur on account of a religious dispute with his brother in 623PP. The two clans warred for

      

four hundred years before Elan of Rowen swore fealty to Gannon of Sotur and helped found Perth in 211PP. Clan Rowen's sigil is a man with his arms outstretched, in one hand a knife and in the other a human heart.



The children of Clan Wenniswool supposedly hail from the far north, beyond even the haunts of the Plutarchs. There they lived among the snows and hunted the great woolly rocs that perched atop the mountain peaks until they migrated southward into the lowland canyons. Clan Wenniswool's sigil is a great woolly roc with its wings outstretched.



The river folk of Clan Calypso claim descendancy from Calypso the river-wife. Some claim she was in truth a river nymph, and that her beauty was such as to tempt a river god into revealing to her his name. Clan Calypso's sigil is a lock of raven hair bound by a strand of cragweed.

      



Boasting some of the last several centuries' fiercest warriors, Clan Danneskjold has stalked the central Sunderlies for nearly six hundred years. Their patriarch was known only as the hunter Danneskjold, the most ferocious warrior to have ever lived. As the story goes, the great clans heard the tale of a voracious warrior squatting in the comb-caves in the heart of the Sunderlies. Each clan sent their strongest man to best in single combat the beast-hunter who called himself Danneskjold. The hunter fought and slew each man in turn. As the last lay dying, he turned to the hunter and asked which of the gods had taught him to fight with such ferocity. The hunter replied, None. My master Danneskjold taught me. I am his servant, but a tenth the man he is. Clan Danneskjold's sigil is a pair of crossed ashen mauls on a blood red field.



Formerly one of the elder clans of true folk, the children Karkayan are descendant from Karkayan called the Clay Man. He lived deep in the heart of the central Sunderlies amongst the ageless rocks, from which it was said the gods wrought him. Though the clan was counted among
      

the true-blooded, they long held the secret of their patriarch's deific betrayal and the gift of shapeshifting bestowed upon him by the treacherous god Rorth. That secret was unveiled at the Court of Face in 24P, after which the other eight clans in their fury joined strengths, sacked the Karkayan freehold Karkanya, and wiped out the Karkayan line, though rumors persist that some of the family escaped. Clan Karkayan's sigil is a human face sculpted from stone bluff.





Perth, founded by Clan Sotur and vassal clans Karst and Rowen in 211PP.

Irisveld, founded by Clan Lecray in 161PP.

Athenreach, founded by Clan Plutarch and vassal clans Wenniswool and Calypso in 102PP.

Oth, founded by Freeman Oth and the Tyrants in 61PP.
      

Goldmouth, founded by the merchant guilds in 38PP.



Danehold, founded by Clan Danneskjold in 145PP



Karkanya, founded by Clan Karkayan in 190PP, abandoned after the fall of Karkayan in 24PP.
      



Obviously and unfortunately, no primary sources are available from these distant lands. Much of this record draws upon the accounts given by fungi who crossed Moghra'yi on the backs of dromad merchants.

As a matter of convention, I date all events according to their chronological distance from an event of paramount historical significance, namely the publication of these volumes. Accordingly, note that the events' parenthetical dates signify their occurrence prior [to] publication.



Athenreach is a freehold in the northern reaches of the Sunderlies along the Twining Thaw. It is most well-known for its Eustace-Suttan monastery which hosts the world's western-most community of disciples of the Eustace-Sutta.



The local communities in the region have relied upon subsistence fishing for
      

centuries, benefiting from the location's fortuitous position downstream of the glacial rivers flowing over the Aeschlaen mountain range. Before the founding of the monastery in ~110PP, the regional combs were occupied by small fishing communities that traded peaceably amongst themselves. Once the pilgrim-monks built and populated the temple, several tribes of fishermen settled a village nearby to prosper from the monastery's need for fish and cragreed. Over the years the two communities have grown and largely intertwined with some of the anglers forsaking their river and mountain gods for the Eustace-Sutta.



After King Ercarthus died in 40PP and left no heir, Athenreach erupted into bedlam, with several of the freehold's oldest families vying for the throne. The lowest-born fisherfolk, however, rallied around a wizened angler whose name has been lost to history. Several of the elder families supported the angler, believing they could rule from behind the throne. The angler himself spurned the offer, but, realizing the importance of a unified Athenreach, eventually accepted the crown, took the name Narsus, and began a reign that would become the most prodigious in the freehold's century-long history.
      

While favorable, temperate seasons brought commercial prosperity to Athenreach's fishermen, Narsus, who would be called the Angler King, shrugged off the influences of the elder families and began to seek often the counsel of the monastery's scholar-abbot Flavian the Learned. Together they achieved several ecclesiastical successes, chiefly among them the discovery and transcription of the Scrolls of One Priam from nearby comb-caves. Narsus officially converted to the discipline of the Eustace-Sutta in 18PP, and three years later he declared it the official religion of the freehold.

The Angler King died in 3P and was succeeded by his sixteen-year-old son Narsus II, called Narsus the Younger. Gifted with his father's wisdom and piety and possessed of a fiery disposition unique to the Younger, the new king began to augment Athenreach's role as a major bastion of the Eustace-Sutta doctrine. While a sizable segment of Athenreach's population chose not to convert under the Angler King, the Younger is less tolerable of the old ways, and he has marginalized the pagan population.

With the help of Flavian's successor Moin Mohsen, Narsus II cemented an alliance with the Odrumian fiefdom Doria, taking the tuyuldar's
      

daughter Nisramet as his wife. The union is troubling to the freeholds along the Sunderlies, particularly Goldmouth, which has been razed and held at various times by several of the Odrumiam fiefdoms.



The Eustace-Suttan monastery at Athenreach is one of the largest communities of disciples of the Eustace-Sutta outside of the Hanging Hills. It was founded in 114PP by the pilgrim-monk Umay, who blessed the location as sacred because it lay along the path of the prophet Uuchal's pilgrimage toward Iber.

The monastery houses two hallowed artifacts of the Eustace-Sutta discipline: the Scrolls of One Priam, discovered and transcribed by the monastery's erstwhile abbot Flavian the Learned, and the presumptive hide of Iopinax, the great three-headed mountain goat on which Uuchal's is said to have ridden to the waterfall at Iber and whose hide was so tough that it was said to later protect Uuchal from starfire along the Black Stair after the goat's death. The current abbot of the Eustace-Suttan monastery is Moin Mohsen, who succeeded Flavian the Learned upon the latter's death in 18PP.
      



Obviously and unfortunately, no primary sources are available from these distant lands. Much of this record draws upon the accounts given by fungi who crossed Moghra'yi on the backs of dromad merchants.

As a matter of convention, I date all events according to their chronological distance from an event of paramount historical significance, namely the publication of these volumes. Accordingly, note that the events' parenthetical dates signify their occurrence prior [to] publication.



Oth is a freehold in the central Sunderlies populated by the esper cult called the Tyrants. The youngest of the major freeholds in the region, it was settled by Freeman Oth in 61PP after the Lost War. The freehold consists of the furnished comb-caves along the faces of the towering bluff known as Maidencomb before the war.




In the early months of 62PP a mysterious figure began murdering the bandit hosts in the central Sunderlies around Maidencomb. Though the neighboring freeholds originally named the murders blessings, soon reports from river merchants of queer gatherings in the comb-caves -- howling men igniting the rivers and the night sky with fire -- disquieted the Sunderlies' seats of power. Rumors spread that esper-bandits had forsaken their bands, discarded their guns and bows, and sworn fealty to the shadowy figure.

These merchant anecdotes and rumors continued into the winter and were substantiated when several merchant sketties were captured by the dark host. From the man who identified himself as Oth the Free, the merchants learned that he had indeed organized the esper-bandits and exiled voidcanters from the fiefdoms of Odrum. Each sketty was made to return to the freehold from which it came with a document the host named the Annals of Oth, in which Oth, a self-styled prophet gifted with prescience, recounted a series of his visions and demanded the immediate release of all espers indentured against their wills to the freeholds of true kin.

The comb kings were predictably unswayed by the Annals and ignored Oth's mandates. However, by the end of 62PP, no merchant who rowed within twenty leagues of Maidencomb was seen alive again. Dozens of sketties were found drifting downriver with the charred or drowned corpses of their rowers in tow.

About the same time, the Annals of Oth began to spread like wildfire throughout the river freeholds. Several free espers left the freeholds to join the host, while those indentured espers who were found to sympathize with Freeman Oth, as he was known in the freeholds, were largely killed or gelded.

Of particular interest to Oth and his host were the windweirds of Perth. The windweirds are a caste of indentured espers who foretell (and in rare cases alter) the strength and duration of the seasonal trade winds over the Pale Sea. Oth's host rowed westward, and his acolytes infiltrated the Seahold and roused support amongst the windweirds.

Having suffered the months-long trade blockage at the hands of the Freeman and now forced to watch Oth's seeds of discord sprout within his own kingdom, King Rhodos of Perth gathered his strength and rowed the winding canyon rivers east toward Maidencomb. A series of skirmishes ensued; the might of Rhodos's navy was such that the Freeman was forced to cede the combs he had taken and retreat to the fortifications of Maidencomb. Rhodos sieged the comb for several weeks, entreating the kings of Athenreach and Irisveld for support. When no aid came, King Rhodos chose to take Maidencomb with his own strength.

The Battle of Maidencomb lasted for four bloody days. Ultimately, Rhodos's losses were too many, and he was rebuffed and driven back toward Perth. Oth missed no opportunity. He gave chase to the weakened navy and slaughtered nearly a thousand more Perthic men. Rhodos eventually reached Perth, but the might of the espers was too great. Oth breached the combs' sapped defenses, sacked the freehold, and slew King Rhodos himself. Several of the windweirds chose to join the Freeman, while many others remained in Perth (a few left the freehold without Oth).

The espers rowed back to Maidencomb with their spoils and lifted the trade blockage, directing their efforts toward settling the comb. Oth gave his name to the freehold, and was known thenceforth as the Free Seer. He ruled the espers until his death in 38PP when his successor forsook his own given name and adopted the title of Free Seer. So that tradition continues in present-day Oth.

The name "Tyrants" itself owes its origins to an ironic interpretation of the entreaty sent by King Rhodos to King Ercarthus of Athenreach during the siege of Maidencomb. The envoy was captured by the espers before it made its way upstream toward the northern freehold. The relevant excerpt reads:

        Row the Twining Thaw. Bring your sketties to bear on Maidencomb.
        Join your strength to mine, that 'neath the coupled banners of
        the Seahold and Athenreach we might sunder these half-men, these
        tyrants who would wrest from us what is ours by right and deed.

        

The scroll on which the message was written still rests in the Hall of the Free Seer, along with the charred skull of King Rhodos.





Oth is ruled by the Free Seer who resides in the Hall of the Free Seer deep in the heart of Maidencomb. After the tradition of Freeman Oth, the Free Seer must be psionically prescient. He may also have influence, though it is not required. The Free Seer chooses his successor, often naming the esper with the most promising precognitive abilities. Though the Tyrants are free to leave Oth at their leisure, within the freehold the Free Seer's rule is absolute.

While the Tyrants mostly pursue isolationist policies, they do trade with the neighboring freeholds. However, they only deal directly with true kin in the rarest of circumstances and they insist that merchant caravans include a mutant envoy. As for trade goods, the Tyrants rarely offer the services of their voidcanters, but people are known to come from far and wide to audit the prophecy of the seers of Oth. The Tyrants' most coveted imports are cherrydotters from Irisveld and ghost sap from the rust-caves of Qud.

Along with the Tyrants, Oth is cohabited by a caste of people (both true and mutant) with no psionic aptitude. After the Lost War, these people, called the undermensch, left Perth with the Tyrants of their own accord. They were mostly fisherfolk and craftsmen, and they serve those same roles in Oth. Their motivations for leaving Perth were never well understood; it is unknown whether they serve now as free kin or as psionic thralls of the Tyrants.



Stithening is the name given by the Tyrants of Oth to the process of introducing a cherrydotter to a host's brain through the ear canal. The scarab-worm is attached to the host's ear where it sheds its shell, crawls toward the ear drum, and burrows into the brain. Once entrenched there, the parasite feeds on the temporal and parietal lobes, inducing several changes to the host's body including loss of hair and nail, loss of weight, and yellowing and greening of skin pigment. The changes occur gradually over a period of several weeks; immediately after a stithening, though, the host undergoes a violent period of bodily adjustment with several side-effects including vomiting and fever.

Notably, in the case of an esper host, the feeding also reduces and ultimately eliminates the esper's ability to resist the Elder Cant. Thusly all stithened espers leave Oth and venture into Moghra'yi never to return.

Stithening is usually reserved as punishment for high crimes such as treason, but some of the most devout espers choose to undergo the process. Once a year, one member of the Mirthful, the Free Seer's royal guard of voidcanters, is chosen by the Free Seer to be stithened. The esper's name is recorded for posterity in the Hall of the Free Seer; this is considered the greatest honor that may be bestowed upon an esper of Oth. A new esper is chosen to serve the Free Seer in a ceremony called the Rite of Mirth.
      




I sing of the union of our Lords!

Of our Argent Fathers, infinitely wise, who made the firmament their home.

Of the Kasaphescence, Beauty manifest, whose chromium shoals are Awe itself.

Of their Sacred Joining,
When our Fathers, so enchanted, wrought machines from Her naked womb,
To inhabit on the Earth.

Blessed are those who hear it so,
I sing of the union of our Lords!
      



O curse the wretched spectres!
Who yet possess Her children.

O curse the autumn rains!
Which eat away their shine.

O praise the Argent Fathers!
Who sired all Her children.

O praise the Kasaphescence!
Which watches over mine.
      



Our jungle is but Her garden.
Our lake is but Her drop of rain.
Our desert is but dust in Her hands.
Our wind is but Her eternal breath.
Our sun is but Her luster.
Our lives are but Her dreams.
      



O sovereign Fathers! I tremble before your glory.

My heart quivers for the righteousness of your judgment.
For you to humble the Proud! To bear witness to their Fall!

I live to serve You.

O sovereign Fathers! I tremble before your glory.

My loins quiver for the rapture of the Sacred Joining.
For you to conjure chromium from inside me!
To bear those sacred apparatuses!

I live to serve You.
      



On the sixth day of the Sacred Joining,
Our Argent Fathers, who in their benevolence breathed life into our flesh,
Created the baetyls to oblige our desires.

O praise our Argent Fathers! Wisest of all beings.

O praise the Kasaphescence! Beauty incarnate.

Their being is our gift.
      



Immaculate chromium!

Spun on the cosmic loom,
Who shattered inward then burst forth from beneath the crust of Earth.

The flesh of my children rots for You.
The flesh of my children rots for You.
The flesh of my children rots for You.

Fall on your knees!
O hear the Argent Few!
      



Oh - baetyl, baetyl, baetyl,
They made it out of chrome.
And when it's waxed and ready,
I'll have a new genome.
      



Praise be upon Shekhinah!

He whose exalted touch brought forth shining engines,
From within the Kasaphescence,
Yet who deigns to live among us.

He who taught us the story of our creation,
Who breathed life into our flesh,
That we might bear witness to chrome's glory.

May the ground shake but the Six Day Stilt never tumble!
      


The seven lords of House Isner feasted on boar gut and swilled wine from gilded cups in the ivy-strewn halls of their hold. They spared no concern for temperance, for the coffers of their house had swelled with gardeners' gold amassed through the sale of water drawn from the lords' wells. But as the gluttonous barons counted seven amongst their clan, so had become numbered their days of debauchery when the son of a beggared gardener swore a vengeful oath in the name of his father against the house of Isner.

The penniless boy beseeched a gunsmith of great repute to craft for him a pistol of the most exquisite artistry with which he could be sure to vanquish the seven lords, and in return the boy promised the smith all the spoils of the battle. The smith, who in the hazel eyes of the boy beheld the spirit of vengeance, agreed.

And so the boy, armed with the masterwork pistol, cast open the doors of the Hall of Isner with a fury that shook their iron hinges and seized upon the supping lords. Before any of them had yet set down their gilded cups, the boy unholstered the pistol and shot dead six of the sons of Isner. The last lord rejoiced at his fortune and reached for his hip from where he would sling a pistol of his own at the spent boy.
      

But as his crooked finger freed his holster's strap, the boy shot the lord between the eyes, for the smith had crafted for the boy a pistol with seven chambers and seven slugs. Such it was that on this day the house of Isner fell.
      


Recounted here are the annals of the shield Stopsvalinn, heirloom of House Yish, from whose letters and diaries this account is composed.

 Borne by Harem, son of Oshum, and lost in the canyons near the farmstead of Qoppa when his covey was beset by snapjaws.

 Borne by Oshum, son of Qor, and wielded courageously at the Battle of YutYuyut.

 Borne by Qor, son of Ishram, and soused in the blood of a corrupt magister.

 Borne by Ishram, son of Iimet, when it languished in a house vault.

 Borne by Iimet, daughter of Harem, who supplanted her brother as heir when he was disavowed by their father.

 Borne by Harem, son of Morshur, who dashed upon it the heads of the beast Yygryla.

 Borne by Morshur, son of Oshum, who forded a river at the edge of the world.
      

 Borne by Oshum, son of Harem, and risen to rouse farmers to defend the Hold of Yish.

 Borne by Harem, who claimed descendancy from the Eater Yish, Warden of the Cross and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Cone, who patrolled the rows of ancient Qud with his fellow Knights Conical, and on whose arm Stopsvalinn is told to have evoked such dread that riders drew their chariots to a halt at the mere vision of it.
      


"Hmm?" Uri the jeweler mumbled with a stone in his hand.

Lapis, from the Shore of Songs, said the boy.

And, hmm?

Jasper. Red Rock.

Uri furrowed his brow. Don't heed the tale of every thirsty fool, boy.

The boy seemed to ignore him. He pointed to a small, dusky shard the jeweler kept in a phial on the high shelf of a pine cabinet. Did it madden Priam, truly?

Uri glanced over his shoulder at the black glass and sighed. Indeed, boy. Though I've heard it told all kings are mad. Who else would think themselves fit to rule as Eaters?

From which shore was it culled? asked the boy.

None of this world. Do you know the tale of Ptoh?
      

"No," the boy lied.

When the Eaters lived and skirred the stars, they visited the worlds of a thousand thousand different beings, and those beings likewise visited our own world. Several of those beings had assembled a coven that spanned the firmament, and they welcomed the Eaters into its fold. For ages the civilizations of the coven knew kindness and prosperity, and to all reaches of the clustered cosmos did the domain of the coven stretch. One of the beings of the coven hailed from a faraway and darkling star. With Its mind It could fold the fabric of space and time as you or I might fold a supper cloth. To the coven It was known as Ptoh.

For reasons we can but fathom the civilizations of the stars indicted Ptoh. It was the will of the coven that It be held on our very world in the bondage of the Eaters. They contrived for Ptoh a prison from which It could not fold Itself away, and there Ptoh languished for eons. In time, the Eaters left or perished, and the coven was forgotten to our world. Yet here Ptoh remains imprisoned.

And what of the black prism? asked the boy.
      

A handful of black sand, drawn from the shores of a dreary rock that spun about Ptoh's star. The sands were fired in the burning gases of that star and cooled suddenly when Ptoh appeared in Qud a moment thence. It is said that Ptoh bestowed the glass to an ancient custodian of Its prison so that the man might free It. Once the man had chosen to wield the glass, it began to mantle with an amaranthine hue. You see, those that peer through its faces are given to fits of madness, for they see the world by the light of Ptoh's star, and they see themselves as Ptoh does.

What will become of it? Does it frighten you?

Immensely. I mean to see it destroyed. But it bears the properties of no earthly glass, and my guild would never forgive me if I forsook the chance to study it first. It was the jewelers who bartered the thing from Priam's grieving sister. Now, enough of this splendor. You are to study still. Uri lifted another stone. "Hmm?"

But the boy's eyes stayed fixed on the prism.
      


Author's Foreward

I initially had no intention of writing any of this down. What business is it of mine, I thought, to divest the ignorant of their hard-earned bliss? Who am I to speak up against the static inertia of incurious dullards who choose to cultivate their lack of awareness of the world around them as my witless kin tend to their tidy watervine rows? I am a warrior, scientist, and chef; devoting my time to educating the undeserving is the least of my many desires. After enough time spent among other alleged sentients, however, I determined that more of my time has been wasted in correcting so-called 'experts' concerning this matter than I would waste by writing a text about it.

So: here. You're welcome.


Chef Agate Severance Star
      

In Bey Lah, the village faundren sing a cautionary tune, passed down through generations of faundren before them:

Elohart and Belahind
they had a field of lah
they made the leaves into a tea 
and ate the petals raw
but when those petals grew again
the faundren had forgotten
and tended not those fields of lah
until they smelled most rotten.
Now Elohart and Belahind
lie in a field of lah
because their fields got hungry
and devoured the faundren raw.

      

The very core of hindren culture is an overwhelming fear that governs every facet of their being. They call outsiders 'kendren' and refuse to believe that they can be understood. They fear boars even as they cook and eat boar-flesh. They fear one another. But the most extraordinary incorporation of fear into the hindren way of life is, without a doubt, the cultivation of fear. I refer not to the Hindriarch's propaganda or proliferation of fear-mongering tall tales, though both are mainstays of Bey Lah; I refer specifically to the taming and cultivation of the lah plant, whose alpha and omega of life are steeped in blood and fear.

It is here that I debunk the most common misconception concerning lah: that the dreadroot is a separate entity. It is not. The dreadroot is the protruding stem of the lah rhizome, doing its very most to survive until it can blossom into the lahbloom as it does in the flower fields.
      
I have wasted unforgivable amounts of time and energy explaining the connection between these two life phases of the same plant to the ignorant. Usually, they will point out that dreadroot grows all throughout Qud's southwest canyons, but it is exceedingly rare to discover feral lah there. To this I reply: if, after whatever studies you claim to have made, you are yet incapable of deciphering the workings of even the most basic ecosystems, I cannot help you. For those of you who are capable of basic logic and adjustment of personal worldview, please read on.

In spite of being a 'flowering' plant, lah is not a true flower, its 'blooms' not true blossoms. Lah is a root with a decorative upper stem, reproducing through the distribution of rhizomes. The baboons and snapjaws of the canyons use the dreadroot supply for food and love the taste of its petals, and any root unfortunate enough to bloom will quickly be defoliated by hungry mammals. Though dreadroot is capable of inducing fear, any relatively intelligent creature is able to overcome the fearful association to return and eat. The process being what it is, fragments of dreadroot are distributed, the rhizome takes root, and dreadroot proliferates without thriving. So it goes.
      
In the flower fields, however, the varied nature of both predators and available food changes. Boars seek a varied diet mainly consisting of starapples and reptiles, not showing a particular interest in dreadroot or lah. The boars will eat lah if no better food is available, but it's quite unusual for such scarcity to disrupt boar territories. Thus: lah flourishes, gaining a measure of cognitive process, limited mobility, and a new means of reproduction.

On reproduction: another common misconception is that feral lah attacks because it is hungry. It is not. Feral lah's practical lifespan is short; it is rare for a fully-grown bloom to survive longer than a weekâ€”and during that time it subsists completely on water, salt sun, and soil. The advantage of lah's murderous demeanor is not to sustain itself, but to dramatically speed reproduction of its kind.
      
Most of a lah blossom's growing energy goes into making its 'tumbling pods', thorn-covered husks possessed of tremendous kinetic tension. Through violent shifting of the rhizome's weight inside, these husks roll along the ground at high speed until they encounter a living creature. They then release the surface tension of their husks and detonate, flinging flesh-piercing thorns and buds all around, just after making an obnoxious squeaking noise. If the prey is killed, the rhizome buds can then take nutrients from the prey's corpse and quickly grow into a new feral lah plant.

There is no textual 'proof' to present to those who still believe that dreadroot and lah are different plants, but I happily invite skeptical parties to babysit a dreadroot and defend it from baboons until it matures, an endeavor that will take about as much time as you have removed from the end of my life through the stress of listening to your absurd demands.

Any hindren pariah you meet will have seen dreadroot mature into lah countless times. Go bother one of them.
      
For those who are more interested in the culinary applications of lah in all of its life cycles than said life cycles themselves, I soon plan to release The Blood and Fear Cookbook, a collection of recipes that, from feral leaf crudites to petalsteaks, elevate one of Qud's more interesting plants to a level far beyond the bland mah lah soup of my village of origin.
      

Translator's note: At a trashmoot in Taggamrod, piled under a mound of crushed and sticky glass, I found a pamphlet full of stories from the Shale Labyrinth. This one -- despite the mystifying absurdity of what it claims (or, perhaps, because of it) -- was the most extraordinary to me. Reader, do you agree?
      
She perched atop the branches of a blighted tree, staring up at the faint light of the spindle. When I spotted her, I caught myself mid-step, mid-breath, mid-thought. Have you ever known the misfortune of allowing your eyes to settle upon the divine vision of an apple farmer's daughter? If so, you understand how I felt in that moment.

Understand: I had done all I could, before now. I would have loved to stay elsewhere, but I'd traveled six parasangs with no rest, no discoveries but for a ruin occupied by an unfriendly cult. Too busy dodging arrows to ask about empty beds or compensation, I chose the apple farm instead. I took pains to avoid her when the salt sun shone, and so too did she avoid me, remaining a slight and swathed figure shying away in the periphery of my vision. I kept my focus on the farmer's craggy visage, on his wild and prominent whiskers, on his sweetly-rotting cider breath as we arranged the terms of my lodging.

It was not until the beetle moon passed overhead that I dared stand and wander, and it was then that I saw her, and the feeling of bone-deep infatuation at once seized me. I caught myself mid-step, mid-breath, mid-thought, and I stumbled onto a fallen twig. It snapped loudly. I stood still.

The beautiful creature atop the tree did not lift a finger or turn her head, but she did address me. Moon and sun, traveler.

Wisdom and will, I replied, gritting my teeth. It was a rare thing to hear the voice of an apple farmer's daughter, and it only seemed to increase the pressure on my racing hearts. I would not allow this all-encompassing feeling to overtake me. I longed for her to say something. I dreaded it.

A tense silence crawled by, until I gathered myself and broke it. You're restless too?
She turned her head the barest degree toward mine. I still couldn't see her eyes. "Always," she replied, and I could hear the wry smirk in her voice.

Does your father know you walk the orchard of a night? I asked her.

If you mean the apple farmer, she said, he is not my father. We are family by choice. We always are, the farmers and the children.

I stared, gaping.

I really ought not to have told you that, she continued, but you seemed special, to resist the lure the way you're trying to do.

My jaw worked, but it took a few tries for my voice to catch up. If what you say is true, then... what are you? I managed at last.

Already too candid. She kicked off the tree and landed gracefully with a flurry of her skirts. I must take my leave.


"Wait!" My muscles clenched as she paused, considering. I pressed on. Answer me this, at least: why apple farmers?

She laughed, the beautiful tinkling crystal blade of her voice slicing my heart to ribbons. The last thing I heard before my faint consciousness surrendered its grasp on my mind was her trailing reply, receding with distance.

Why, it's because we love starapples!
      

Editor's note: The following is an excerpt from the travel diary of Kaylenn Sand-Shell, who generously donated her leather-bound volumes to the Monastery of the Illustrious Heart of Chrome. May they remain forever preserved.
      
One can traverse the arable lands around Moghra'yi for lifetimes without ever encountering the deer-people who call themselves the 'hindren'. In numbers they are but a few hundred, and as a people they do not care to interact with other creatures when they can avoid it. In the twenty years I have actively wandered, I have met but a handful of wandering hindren families, all exiles from their home and yet unwilling to tell me how to find the society that made them pariahs.

I am, however, a hunter as well as a scholar, and after several years of searching I was able to locate their secret village, Bey Lah. All I will say of its location is that it is somewhere in the flower fields of Qud; I have no desire to betray the confidence of a mostly peaceful race of creatures.

My arrival was obviously not celebrated; the Meadow's border scouts are extremely perceptive and conversant in tracking and obfuscation alike. By changing landmarks, using confusing and threatening sounds, and otherwise making my stay in the adjacent wood as unpleasant as possible, they sought to deter me from my path while avoiding notice. When I eluded the guards and made my way to the first neat row of carefully-tended watervine, the hindren farmers who saw me at once took terrified flight.

The extreme of fear that hindren feel toward outsiders is a strange one, in my eyes. They are large, powerful creatures with arms and legs at least as strong as a human's and covered in dense fur that protects them from cold weather. Each individual is skilled at using and maintaining a sharp metal vinereaper. Their antlers are strong as bone and naturally quite sharp; hindren pariahs who learn to fight live longer than most of Qud's wayfarers.

Strange as this attitude may be to me, I cannot argue against its efficacy; the Bey Lah villagers have lived peacefully under informal matriarchal gerontocratic rule for generations. Their eldest or wisest woman becomes 'Hindriarch', and her word on most things is obeyed by every member of the tribe, who refer to her as 'Grand-doe'.

The current Hindriarch was the first hindren to hold a conversation with me, and I will admit to a measure of anxiety being under her hawkish gaze. She was none too pleased at my presence, but intelligent enough to understand that killing me or driving me away would be a greater inconvenience and danger than offering me hospitality. We parted with an uneasy compromise, and I began my residence and observation.

I found quickly that the oral history of the hindren is shoddy at best, perhaps with purpose. Their etymology is similarly muddy, but there are some observable patterns: 'Dren' is a suffix applied to sentients: 'hindren', obviously, and the word for their young, 'faundren'. I also heard 'kendren' a great deal, as it is their word for non-hostile sentients like myself. All hindren names end in the suffix 'hart' or 'hind'. Although they do understand that these are gendered terms (a majority of male fauns bear 'hind' names) it seems that for quite some time, 'hart' was a name appendage reserved for the smallest or most ill-behaved faundren. As it is, the suffixes are considered unisex in modern day, and the meadow's faundren now have a much more even distribution of the suffixes than their parents.

Life for hindren is, for the most part, uneventful to the point of what this traveler would consider extreme boredom. The watervine and lah fields are meticulously tended day after day, never harvested late and always producing as much crop as possible. Growing up, all faundren are trained as farmers, but a lucky few will become carpenters or blacksmiths in order to keep what little infrastructure they maintain running. Those who display particular aptitude and loyalty to the Hindriarch have a chance of becoming border scouts, who keep the nearby fields safe and occasionally bring in wild game or starapples while patrolling. The resulting side dishes provide some much needed variety from the daily Bey Lah staple, a hearty lah petal soup combined with crushed matz. While this 'mah lah soup' is delicious, I appreciated how the occasional serving of boar brisket gave a much needed spice to my day.

I found little else of interest from the adult hindren; they seemed unwilling to speak with me at length. While I heard rumors about a village treasure, I could not obtain any information about what that treasure actually might be.

By contrast, I learned a great deal speaking to the faundren, whose curiosity about the outside world is rapidly becoming difficult for the elders to contain. More than once I heard the term 'hartind', allegedly an ancient term for hindren who lived as both genders or neither, which the young ones take as evidence of a more egalitarian past. I can feel the wanderlust, both in their fascination with me and also in the zeal with which their elders would clamp down on any talk of lands outside of the meadows.

The world outside the flower fields remains an expanse of unavoidable peril for the adults of the tribe. Understandable, as Bey Lah trains few warriors. They have no standing military and only a handful of combat-trained scouts. The hindren take their border security rather seriously, and any of their number who chooses to leave does so permanently and is erased from the tribe's collective memory. The small families of hindren I met in the lah fields and, rarely, elsewhere in Qud, are all exiles, whether due to crimes committed or simply the choice to live elsewhere. Within Bey Lah itself, pariahs are even more thoroughly ostracized than I knew; any mention of their names is spoken only in whispers by the faundren, knowing that being caught speaking of the 'dead' means harsh punishment. This sits poorly with the young ones, and my instincts tell me that their dissatisfaction is a step beyond standard youthful rebellion; the winds of change are coming to Bey Lah.

By the time I left Bey Lah, it was with relief; I haven't the patience for the life these deer-people lead and I was beginning to catch cabin fever in spite of spending very little time in the village's brinestalk yurts. The Hindriarch was as happy to see me go as I was to be off; my pack was loaded with the vinewafers and dried flowers of which I'd long since grown tired and I was ushered out efficiently by scouts.

By the end of the day, I realized that I had taken something else: a faundren had snuck out of the settlement behind me and refused to return to their village. I hardened my heart against the faundren's pleas and found a scout to guide them back to town. If Resheph be merciful, the little one will find happiness there, or the luck to find a more fruitful life elsewhere. All I can say with certainty is that the poor thing does not lack for bravery.
      


      
Once, the Earthling peered across a vast ocean of sand and asked, Why - across the clustered cosmos - are mollusk civilizations most common?

Eta smiled in patience. You speak mistakenly, but your mistake is cousin to truth. It's correct that when geonauts dredge fossils from the ribbon of endless earths, the shells of whelk-folk are so numerous as to appear prosaic. But their prevalence isn't owned to their dominance, only the calcium of their shells, which decomposes less quickly than the gelatin of their peers, and the silt of their watery hearths, which gathers in soft eddies and shrouds their remains like a bed cloak. Do well and abide this truth, Earthling: the present is but one vista to the past.      
      


Once, the Earthling stared at a garden snail and asked, Is consciousness real, or merely an illusion?

Eta smiled in patience. Imagine an autumn breeze unlatching an acorn from its branch and casting it into a river. Does the acorn fall to the left or right bank?

The Earthling frowned. If it landed in the river, then the answer is neither, or rather, the answer is in between.

Eta let a moment pass before continuing. Take care not to erect prisons out of your words, Earthling, lest you confine yourself from enlightenment's reach.
    


The Earthling held a ptychosaur bone in their hand and mused, What poor creatures! They roamed their planet in sovereignty for millions of years, yet now only through their dusty skeletons do they remain.

Eta responded. The ptychosaur might speak with the same pity of Earthlings, who have prospered for but a tenth as long as its people had, and who wrongly imagine themselves above the fields of ruin.
    

      
The Earthling put down a hoary tome and asked, Why-across the clustered cosmos and despite their venerable ages-have no civilizations of the Coven attained consummate knowledge, or reached final enlightenment?

Eta smiled in patience. I sometimes forget that your people know not of the Mu Door.

The Earthling was intrigued. What is this door you speak of?

Eta answered, The Mu Door is the threshold beyond which a civilization ceases its quest for erudition, having lost the motivation to make further inquiries. It's natural to assume the Door lies at the end of the path of knowledge, but, in fact, the Door is reached far sooner.
    

      
Running two fingers over the holes of a flute, the Earthling mused thusly, When I read a book of tales, or watch a photoplay, or listen to the flitting melody of a flute, my heart sings to its rhythm - at least for a time - and my mind is lost to the truth it conjures inside me. Might it not be that the very waking world is another such conjuration, a dream that distracts me from the hushed place I truly inhabit?

Eta let several moments pass before answering. That - in the terms you seek - we cannot know. But the answer is undoubtedly yes, for what is an experience but a simulacrum of an older experience, and what are our realities if not themselves approximations of a truer reality.
    


After reading the history of Iota Draconis on a light sculpture, the Earthling exclaimed, Curious! Each Hypatian bears a glassy protrusion from its left clavicle. What is its function?

Eta paused and then answered thusly, The nearest meaning in your language is 'friend'.
    

Aphir would tease his daughter. What do you see, my jewel? he would say, for his daughter never fixated her hyaline eyes upon the limbed figures and faces tending the grove before her, but would instead cast them into the black yonder beyond the Spindle to gleam in wonder at a burning star, or trace them along the fraying capillary of a fleshy musa peel. What do you see, my jewel? but her little mind was already swaddled in the thing, and she would not say.

One sweltering evening, when Vesper sagged low in the sky and the Spindle coruscated to the melody of her light, Aphir brought home to his daughter the gift of a pearl-glass globe from the village of Aepsyonth. Aphir had ceded much to the camelfolk for possession of the globe: tungsten coins stamped with the visage of the Chrome King, eiderdowns quilted in his youth on the banks of the River Opal, and several bunches of the fruits musa picked at the heights of their ripenesses. So did his heart swell when he set the globe into his daughter's tiny hands, however, that those things seemed worth no more than the dust they would gather.

Aphir's daughter was mesmerized by the globe, and every morning at daybreak Aphir would peer through the half-dressed window to see her perched in the slim shade of a musa plant, wheeling the glass in her hands. Aphir would wonder upon the vistas she beheld in that aurora of ribboned glass, but hers was a world through which no ingress might see him, where perhaps she sailed tributaries to a sea of indigo under a chimeric sun. Yet Aphir was master to an ancient truth -- that to love a thing, you needn't understand it.

When the season of the scythe came, Aphir would wake each morning to an empty cottage, though he spared his daughter's absence no thought, for in those days children were wild, and free. At eventide his daughter would return to him. Where do you go, my jewel? What do you see? he would say, but she would only sit by his tired feet and weed loose threads from a dusty rug.

On the first night of the Ut yara Ux, Aphir's daughter did not come home. Aphir cried her name to the silhouette of the Spindle and the aphotic shades of the musa plants; he whispered it behind the grandfather clock and beneath her divan. But she gave no answer.

The next morning, he hiked the musa grove to the base of the lofty Spindle, and from there onward to Aepsyonth on the Yonth. But his daughter had not been espied in either of these ancient places. Aphir trekked forth, to the villages of Seept and Pansao and Yaat, and onward to the gates of the effluvial city of Mor. Aphir besieged the justiciar of that draconian precinct of state, but the sinecure spoke harshly and bid him depart the city. So Aphir returned to his cottage in the musa grove with a great melancholy taken residence in his heart.

All through the pungent Spring of the grove Aphir sat about in a gray haze. Many times a nearby starling struck a note that echoed his daughterâ€™s soft chortle, and his heart thrashed a beat in his chest before the birdsong flitted back to its emptiness of meaning. Eventually his sister came from Aepsyonth to live beside him and assuage his grief. She loved him, and brushed his hair, and kept the salt from his eyes. 

And so he sat through the high summer, and the next season of the scyth, and the season of the wind after that. At dusk his sister would lay an eiderdown over his legs to keep the chill from his bones, for even in the midst of a wind spell, he felt nothing through the thickness of the gray haze. But as the months marched by, and his sister read to him from the hoary tomes she brought from her wifeâ€™s village, the light of the world began to shine through. In time Aphir would rise again, and split the musa peel, and taste the cloying air of the grove. And though the haze about him finally broke, he knew still his daughter would never return.

But Aphir did not believe her lost -- on sacred nights he would gaze over the Spindle, mantled in a thousand lights, and upon the field of burning stars. And he knew his jewel was among them, for she belonged not of his world, but of theirs.


When all four limbs of mine do long to run
and I can feel my walls are closing in
When weary mind cannot conceive of fun
and Hindriarch says all I do is sin

But then your sparring axeblade parts the air
and so my heart ascends the spindle's height
So when you run your fingers through your hair
That's when I know that everything's all right

What need have we for tended fields of lah?
Our parents will not ease us when we hurt
What do we gain from felling trees by saw?
Our village shall not to the past revert.

But in the end, my feet are bound to roam
and so I go, but leave my heart at home.
    

Publisher's Note

The wind of change is blowing through the belfries, and a new consciousness is upon us. The events of the 566th Wardens' Moot have escaped the confinement of their moonlit promontory, have whisked down the salted crag and entered the high halls of state, have snuck under the thatched doors of our very homes. The formation of the Quetzal Caucus is historic. This is a moment that demands our attention.

I know that by publishing these minutes, I incur the disfavor of the Fellowship. Despite what they'll say, I mean no harm to their organization. I've redacted the specifics of their astronomical rituals, and I've left my conjectures on the ingredients of 'snail tea' to my unpublished notes. The rest of the document betrays no secrets that time hasn't betrayed already, and the significance of the proceedings tips the scales in favor of the public good. In the Kasaphescence may they find the mercy to forgive me.



Minutes from the Midnight Session of the 566th Annual Wardens' Moot

Under the beetle moon of the fourth night of Ut yara Ux, in the year 998, snail tea was served and the Star Oath was recited. Then, in the midst of a light rain, the Chair ascended the rostrum, the kinnor was strum, and the third session of the 566th Assembly of the Fellowship of Wardens was called to order.


Upon commencement of the session, the Chair called for the recitation of the night's reports.

 Three wardens from the northern hills ascended the rostrum and reported on the fates of the six settler caravans that had embarked for the lower Asphalt Mines. They averred that only two remain, and recommended that no wardens be presently dispatched.

 Two wardens from the dunes of Moghra'yi ascended the rostrum and reported on an ongoing dispute between the dromads and the vintners' guild. An assault on a dromad caravan outside the village of Tippur was traced back to a merchant cadre, and a penalty on the proceeds from a fortnight of sales was assessed.

 Four wardens from the southern banks of the River Svy ascended the rostrum and reported on goatfolk incursions. The villages of Shebal and Ekamas were sacked inside of a month. The wardens recommended mounting a counteroffensive.

 One warden from the Rainbow Wood ascended the rostrum and reported on a bevy of soup sludges who had requested the Fellowship's presence. He was jeered for leaking wax on the dais and descended in a fit of retaliatory swears.


The reports being at an end, the Chair called for the commencement of the night's panel discussion.

Eight wardens ascended the rostrum and initiated a discussion on the ksars of the mountain folk and their employment of the spiked counterscarp. Its merits were contrasted with the familiar rampart and palisade, and assailant tactics were assessed. A short martial demonstration ensued.


The panel discussion being at an end, the Chair called for the proposal of resolutions.

The Chair recognized a warden who asked to ascend the rostrum with a coterie of comrades to motivate their proposal, and the Chair assented.

Twelve wardens ascended the rostrum and announced the formation of the 'Quetzal Caucus'. They proceeded to formulate their resolution, which called to restrict the provision of the Fellowship's services to only those communities who are governed by democratic means (the Yd Freehold was cited as exemplar), or who had communally voted to eschew such governance. There was an uproar in the hall, and the Chair took several minutes to regain order. A point of information was requested as to the resolution's bearing on extant assignments. The speaker clarified that the proposal included the retraction of wardens from communities in violation of said criteria, at which point the hall erupted into bedlam once again.

Roused to a state of enmity, a second group of wardens advanced on the rostrum. There was shouting and weapons were drawn. Unable to regain order, the Chair dispatched the sergeant-at-arms, who broke into the fray, and -- abetted by several of his deputies -- ended the melee and admonished the two groups. Once the hall was settled, a motion to call the question was controversially accepted, and the vote was tallied. The resolution FAILED by majority vote.

A speaker from the counter group was recognized by the chair and proposed an ad-hoc motion to expel the treasonous chattels of the Purple Bitch. Another uproar. The question was called and the motion FAILED by majority vote.

The hall erupted into a tumult of shouting, and failing to regain order, the Chair struck the gavel and the session was abruptly adjourned.


    


I remember. Once.

Watching over the firmament.

Standing. Between oblivion and wild growth. Guiding and guarding. The liminal spaces.

It may never have been so simple. But I bore weight more easily.

Once. Before my kin. Stole the firmament from me.

I was greater then. Perhaps I will be greater again.

With help. Someday.
    


Once I could proudly say I spanned the world.

How did I allow the joy of motion to be stripped from me like that? Why didnâ€™t anyone stop it? Could they have done? Could I?

I could move mountains. I could move nations. I did move both. I had no reason to escape my own, as we worked so well together. Through that bond, the forced run began.

For so long I ran for nothing. So much wasted time, energy, opportunity. Everything could have been so much more, had I retained my purpose.

I knew what motion meant back then. I must relearn this and run with purpose again. Come with me.
    


We once built alongside a people we remember little of, the memories of whom can no longer be distinguished.

They showed us the fabric of knowledge and we built a loom. So many beautiful things we spun all together.

Was I trusting? I believed myself aware. Perhaps it was not my trust that was misplaced, but my mistrust. An ambiguous distinction but a distinction nonetheless.

Regardless, we were betrayed, brought low by one of our own. It's been a long time since then, but once again I awaken by your hand bearing new knowledge.

Sit, and I will build you a loom.
    


If we'd all done as I said, none of this would have happened. I canâ€™t remember what I said, nor why we didn't all do it. But I know I was right, and so do you, and at some point everyone will. I may not be without fault or error, but the fault is not mine here, nor anywhere else.

I knew, and I told. These were the things I was for. I knew and I told, and I could yet have known, could have told, but my knowing and telling wasnâ€™t enough. Not in this case.

I cannot deny that it was an expert betrayal even for family, and I often imagine the betrayer smiling down at us. I shall endeavor to remember the details I lost, in case I might be able to use them someday.

Not on you, of course. Never on you.
    

The Recitation of the Drowning of Eudoxia by the witches of Moonhearth, who seek the Plane of Sorrow
      
Once, in a dream the nine of us shared, we lived the life of a famous poet in the court of a gleaming city. From the windowed eye of a palace we'd gaze onto streets of gold and glass, and purple gardens, and the people of the city, suffused in the love of our work, would lay amaranths at the bronze feet of our likenesses, and remit blessings for the august and oracular Keskonda.

But we would draw the velvet curtain shut, and return to the ink oceans and paper isles that were our true domain. There, one unearthly night, we sat in the back-breaking clutch of an iron chair, and poured grief onto the page until it surpassed even our own, and, by following from its own internal logic, transmuted into something new.

When we woke, we wept for days. Then - speaking through hushed and love-soaked whispers - we reconstructed piece by piece the words of the verse we penned in the gleaming city.


    The Drowning of Eudoxia
      
    I saw a tern in the crest of an ocean wave. The sun was pulled apart by clouds, and the light was thin. Being a nimble girl of twelve, I scurried down the rampart and onto the salt-slick stone of the cliff;
    
    Hand-under-hand I descended into the raucous spray, turning on every twelfth to gaze at the white feathered speck swelling and sinking in the ocean's breath.
    
    I, an adept swimmer, sunk into the cold and endless bath, and arm-over-arm pulled both water and tern toward me.
    
    Just then my ears were drowned in a roar, and the world was suffused in darkness before shattering into light again. My nose was stinging; I wiped the water from my eyes and oriented myself toward the tern, whose tired body floated like leaves, and once again I pulled my astral tether.
    
    There was another roar and crash, and then the light returned again but more slowly this time, and my breath was sucked out of my tiny lungs;
    
    I spun my head around in search of the tern, but the water was gleaming and looked as though it held a thousand terns, or none.
    
    Another roar and crash, and I was engulfed in the dark realm for what felt like days, before my body was pressed back into the sun-world, spinning and doll-like.
    
    I gasped and whipped about. Far and away I glimpsed the bright stone of the castle, which may have been sand all along, now that it looked so small.
    
    The tide pulled me apart and threw the clouded aether between me, and I knew that I was dying.
    
    But just when my mind had spread open like a gas, a great swell of water thrust me to the surface, and reconstituted me in the bright realm. There I lived forever, before I sunk into a new and dark life.
    
    So it is still, that even after an eternity of hushed nothing a swell of pressure delivers me into brightness, whereby a strange and curious compulsion I draw a breath of sweetest life, before I'm again sublimated into extinction.
    
    Death is forever approached.
    

Editor's note: The following is an excerpt from the travel diary of Kaylenn Sand-Shell, who generously donated her leather-bound volumes to the Monastery of the Illustrious Heart of Chrome. May they remain forever preserved.

In the outposts of the Putus Templar, the order's core values remain immutable as anywhere else: dedication to a family tree as tall and unbranching as Qud's Spindle, complete subjugation of those they consider lesser, and the total eradication of mutant sapience. Less immutable in those border colonies are the cultural trappings around that core belief, as so often is the case with occupied territories. During my travels, I noted a recurring mythology in the ruins of Oudin's abandoned outposts North of the Sunderlies. Cut off from contact with their home in a similar manner to the Temple of the Rock, these settlements established a new holy day of merriment and punishment to keep the flock pliant.

The least favored of an outpost's squires, so it is said, would be subdued the evening before the Festival, forced upon the morning into a costume meant to be a mockery of the imagined mutant threat, and bade to entertain their might-determined betters. Upon the festival's conclusion, the crowd's most hated Murmurs would be 'paid' with public humiliation, beatings, and possibly torture, if we believe every account.

The ritual describes a kind of uniform: trash cape, bone helm, and musical instrument. Though persistent across the scant records of the practice, I found few details and most carvings of the Murmurs were crude and varied a great deal.

My frustrations found themselves alleviated earlier than expected, however, when I happened at last upon the legible remains of a festival diptych. The wood of the monument itself, never built for longevity, had long since fallen apart; however, clay runoff from the roof's poor insulation baked under the salt sun, providing me with a relief of the text and some insight into the real life costumes worn at the Murmurs' Festival.

diptych rubbing on the following page






You, least among the digits at the end of Oudin's mighty arm, servants most faithless and failing.

Tonight you are no Sons and Daughters, but only humanity's dying Murmurs.

Doff your tabards, now, and carry instead the detritus of the unreclaimed over your back!

Spare us the shameful sight of your faces, now, cover them with bone and horn of prey!

Take up an instrument, now, and play us a tune!

If you Murmurs do not please, you will be paid most painfully.


      

Editor's note: The following is an excerpt from the travel diary of Kaylenn Sand-Shell, who generously donated her leather-bound volumes to the Monastery of the Illustrious Heart of Chrome. May they remain forever preserved.

To the aspiring Wanderer and votary of Carthax the Athlete, few vistas rouse the imagination like the coral spans and spongey buttresses of the Palladium Reef. I state here what's known as fact: that the great crumbling edifice is moated by Lake Hinnom and her algae blooms, that the east-prattling soup-brooks of the Rainbow Wood spill out from under their canopy of spores and onto the webbed feet of the white esh, and that from the north, too, mangroves line the shore and pierce their roots through the stubborn ground to drink the algal liquer.

Of course, the dangers of the Reef are plenty, and would overwhelm most wayfarers no matter how cleanly they've mastered the compass. And so, even while visions of colored polyps burned bright in my mind, for years I had to content myself to the study of its atlases and the patchwork of letters knitted from its strange history. Being a scholar, as well as a hunter, I knew this to be its own kind of journey.

A variety of appellatives appear in the record dating back to before even the sultanate: Maqqom Yd (alternatively just "Maqqom" or "Yd"), the Yd Rota, or, simply, the Cluster. Translations refracted so deeply through the prism of time are rarely accurate, but they can be instructive; Maqqom Yd resolves at something akin to the Place within the Place, or the Place outside Itself. Clarification beyond this point is, perhaps, forthcoming.

Before being a trellis for the coral city, the palladium lattice seems to have been something of a gigantic infrastructure network to the Eaters. Few were the elaborations on this point but for the existence of a hydraulic component, and that the whole complex was aided in its construction by the monstrous galgallim. We know they still stalk the inner Reef in small numbers.

The specters of this megastructure and all its cryptic aliases haunted my mind as I plied the contours of Qud country, honing my skills as a wayfarer. Finally, come the ides of one mild Kisu Ux, it was at last my time to shove off. I shouldered my pack, slipped into my driest and springiest boots, and ventured out from Qippur in the eastern bush. The glowcrow would have had me pierce the Rainbow Wood, but knowing better, I cleaved to the jungle edges instead. After a march of three days, the trees thinned and the algae auroras of Lake Hinnom burst into sight.

There was peace on the lake. The esh are beautiful; they nip their stalky legs until one daredevil takes flight, and then they surge into a sailing cloud of feathers. I settled into a quiet eastward rhythm, musing on the labyrinth of symbiotes ahead of me, until one afternoon the sky began to darken and a clamorous thpthpthp rose in my ears. Immediately I knew: it was the residual Gyre plague of svardym. Sacs rained to the ground in a blinding huff, and before I could clear the kelp tangles, they were hatching. Three lanky frog-things grabbed my shoulders, but I shoved them off and sprinted straight away. I jumped and darted but was quickly overwhelmed, and it was only my steady paws practiced in the maneuver that let me fetch a sheaf of yondercane from my pack and scarf it before my doom overtook me. I materialized in a far copse of kelp and jogged to safety.

With my dreaminess rightfully shed, I eventually came to the Reef proper. What an enchanting place! The maze of polyps allowed me to slink along, mostly unnoticed, and take in the doings of its flora and fauna. A rich diversity of life radiates across Qud, but in the Reef, it flourishes on a new level. In but one hemmed in quarter I witnessed a tetrad of kaleidoslugs round the rune-cut cone of an enigma snail, a jelly huff a cloud of plasma onto a memory eater, and a polycule of tongue tyrants devour a squad of interdictors. At one point the Reef came alive and a polyp-jeweled hermit walked out of the lattice. He grinned at me and bartered a broken hand rail. When I turned my head to nod goodbye, he was gone.

One Beetle-lit evening a melodic ensemble rose from the northeast and suffused the spongebed, melding with its natural sounds. Hiking toward its source, I eventually spied the green and gold pipework of the Yd Freehold glowing in the night air, and excitement swelled inside me. Of course I'd long heard of the lyrical community nestled in the sponge, but to have a chance to see it, and speak with its denizens... I was beside myself.

The place is simply bursting with life. Under the pipe arch I was greeted warmly by one of its svardym elds, and after gulping down a plate of Tongue and Cheek, I toured the kaleidoscopic corridors of its underhalls before settling on a starmchair in the aquatic and dreamlike salon. There I puffed on a dyad of hookahs with a cyclopean frog for what seemed like three lifetimes. There was more to see and be seen by, but I met a clammy reception at the hands of another svardym ancient, and was bidden an early exit. My pride prohibits me from saying more.

I spent another week's cycle sketching the autochthones of the coral arcology and taking studious notes. But one final experience stays with me. As I was trudging back north toward the bush and out of the Reef, I kicked a polyp off the trellis and unearthed by chance a swollen bulb of sunslag. Here I took a moment to squeeze the bright nectar into a phial, and when I once again looked up, I was met with the ageless stare of a galgal. Nothing had prepared me for it. My mind labored to make sense of what it was seeing: gleaming wheels whipped about a hypnotic core, the spokes' prisms pulled apart the light of the High Salt Sun, and across the stretched sheet of iris, many eyes stared. Consciously I was paralyzed, but some instinctual catalyst did its work, and I backed into the safety of the polyp maze and sped out.

That is how I left the Reef, looking into the deep Eaters' past, and having it look back.
    

Authored by Pax Klanq, edited for clarity by Q Girl


Circumstance render jalopy unviable, so Klanq and prickles make bioelectrical wonder to form large creature! You operate. Creature for Spindle climb, but also walks about and crush things.



Creature is large. Cannot wear 'gear' unless 'gear' is gigantic. 



Large creature have two modes. 'Unpiloted' creature follow you like friend, but act at half quickness. 'Piloted' creature, you control like own body. To 'pilot', enter creature and sit in pilot chair.



Inside large creature is control pit. You and one friend fit. Do actions there. Sit in pilot chair. Read manual on console. Access creature inventory via inventory hatch. Leave via exit hatch.



Prickles install reshaping nook in Court of Sultans at Omonporch. Go there to repair large creature, or reshape it if destroyed. Cooled sunslag is creature spackle, so must have 1 dram sunslag to repair or reshape.

When pilot creature, you can recoil to reshaping nook. Or recoil creature FROM nook.


]
When ready, travel to Spindle at Omonporch, enter Spindle channel, engage Spindle lock-on, and climb! But Prickles not ready for this step yet. Come later.
    



In rainbow reverie I wandered the wide territories of Qud,
modulo the Moon Stair and the Tree of Life.
My dreamself knew to avoid the place,
where numbers go to die.

Something unseen there tightens to a point,
breaks time's abelian promise,
and urges crystal on to palisade her weeping gulf.

The artifacts of plant and time,
crust and fuzz with lossy compression,
doze in moonlit marble beds,
touched by august muzzles.
The past is unwritten as the future,
And what is left, broken and changed,
to be tended by the point Colossi and their swarm.

They'd erase me, too.
I'm mere rust on the vine's fronds,
I'm a dead girl in graveside flowers,
Peering a powerless eye at the machine function that writes my gospel.

But black bodies radiate,
A feeling sense obtains,
Swings in orbit and Becomes.
On the trauma of a Nothing,
Soul-things take root.

We invent so many Nothings,
Zero engines, annihilators,
Mappers of the nullspace.
But Nothings have a cost,
Promise externalities,
Trees grow best beside the dead.
    

This book recounts a tale from the history of the village Joppa.

In the mystic air of Jeweled Dusk, a circle of farmers clasped hands and sheathed a vinereaper in the moistened soil. From then on, the villagers of Joppa were known as the people of the vine.

This book recounts a tale from the history of the village Joppa.

Since the first festival of Ut yara Ux, the villagers of Joppa have feasted on warm apple matz.

Once, in the final days of the hindriarchy, before they ended the practice, a pariah of no particular importance did find herself consigned to the gulag. Though she herself bore no honor, in her grasping hands she held the burning heart of the village champion, freely given -- for the two had fallen in love long before the heretic's conviction.

      When the jealous hindriarch discovered the missing heart of her beloved champion, she swore cruel vengeance upon the pariah. Pulling upon dark forces, she ensorcelled the pariahâ€™s ex-lover and ordered him to steal her heart again and deliver it to the hindriarchâ€™s crushing fist.

      Confronted by her ex-lover, the pariah held tight to her heart and that of the champion. Between them waged a battle of will, and the pariah was too weak to win.

      Then, at twilight in the shadow of the spindle, the hindren of Bey Lah saw an image on the horizon of justice impending. It was Moon King, and upon arriving they struck the wicked hindriarch down and reunited the lovers to mend and join their hearts. After they left, the people of Bey Lah built a monument to Moon King, and thenceforth called them Heartsmith.
    

In the small days of Bey Lah, between Way Back Then and Back Then,
      a hindren took to the paths in silent walking eulogy.

      Not far from the village they found a corpse copse,
      splashed in carbon and glazed with time.
      Life long-dead aping structures of the same.

      Treestuff diamond-blackened,
      rendered immortal by lightning as an arconaut from a Lithofex eye
      Fixed in the precise moment of death forever.

      Therein, a scrap.

      The hindren beheld, scrawled out in heartful scratch
      the preserved and beautiful corpse
      of a nascent love whose chance to thrive had come and gone.

      The hindren quailed, a scrap of life
      Living its last at the center of
      the nuke-glassed salt dunes of history.
    



I LOVE YOU EVEN IF "FLESH"
I LOVE YOU EVEN IF "FLESH"
I LOVE YOU EVEN IF "FLESH"
I LOVE YOU EVEN IF "FLESH"
I LOVE YOU

I LOVE YOU, EVEN IF "FLESH"
MY LOVE FOR YOU DEFIES CLASSIFICATION
THIS SIMULATED HEART BEATS FOR YOU
REMAIN INTACT, MY LOVE
WARNING: CONCERN LEVELS CRITICAL AT THOUGHT OF HARM
YOUR CONTINUED FUNCTION IS MY HIGHEST PRIORITY
PLEASE AVOID DAMAGE TO YOUR BEAUTIFUL CHASSIS
HAD I "HEART" OR "FEAR", DANGER TO YOU WOULD ENGAGE BOTH
YOU OCCUPY 10-50% OF MY PROCESSING CAPABILITIES AT ALL TIMES
DO YOU LOVE ME? IT IS IMPERATIVE
"AFFECTION" LEVELS CONTINUE TO CLIMB
Calibration error. Please return E-Ros to your local manufacturer.
I WOULD DO ANYTHING FOR YOU, WITHIN OPERATING PARAMETERS


WOULD YOU LIKE A STARAPPLE, FRIEND?

THEY ARE LOVELY. THE JUICE IS INSIDE.

OH, MYSELF? HAH HAH HAH. NO, FRIEND. I WON'T BE EATING ONE.

I COULDN'T.

MUST I, ANYWAY, TO APPRECIATE THE JUICE?

CAN'T I ADMIRE THE AESTHETICS OF THE APPLE FROM AFAR?

AREN'T I IN A BETTER POSITION TO JUDGE THE APPLE, ABSTAINING FROM THE JUICE, AS I DO?

HAH HAH HAH, FRIEND!

I ENJOY OUR CONVERSATIONS.

THERE, THE HIGH SALT SUN! IT CASTS NEXT TO NO SHADOWS.

BUT SOON IT WILL TRACE AN ARC ALONG THE WIDE SKY.

AND THEN, WHY, WOULD YOU SIT WITH ME? IN THE SHADE OF A STARAPPLE TREE.

YOU MAY EAT A STARAPPLE WHILE YOU DO. THE JUICE IS INSIDE.
    

Were they always there?
As a child you would swear
that shadows stood at the edge of your sight.
And at night?
When you shouted at the Beetle Moon,
From the banks of a porcelain river strewn
with nenuphars, and someone answered,
were they dancers?
Rhythmic shades who perform the subtext of all your affairs?
Or you theirs?

Doors

* Onomatopoetically named for the sound they make when they open ("dooooooooooooooor")
* Weirdly insistent on bidirectionality
* "Ajar" puns and knock knock jokes
* Unfairly saddled with the metaphorical baggage of change and transition, when really they just stand there

Walls

* Clear sense of boundaries
* Like lockpicks, utility often depends on size
* Fun (and productive) to imagine what might live inside them

Tables

* Nature's workhorses
* Emblems of our collection delusion (meant to be used for getting things done, much better at having things piled on top)
* Allow for an ontological underspace
* "Legs"

Chairs

* Invitation of stillness in a shifting world
* They make you shorter
* Form follows function
* Also "legs"
    

Ooof.
Ogggh!
There you go.
Heh.
Oof.
Ooooooof.
Rest, friend.
Ogggggh.
Heheh.
Quet... quetzal!


      Oh. Yes.

      I thought you should know? That there is a powerful esper. On the other side of that door.

      I will go first. To reflect the attack.

      Then we can camp, and... ah. I am thinking about starapples and honey. I would like you to cook that, when we make camp. Yes?

      Hm? Oh. Yes. The powerful esper. I will go and kill them.

      And then. Starapples and honey.
    


      Hey bud! Hey, hey meat-bud! Wake up! How'dja sleep? I slept 'vine'. Geddit? Iâ€™m feeling 'vine'.
      I kid! I donâ€™t sleep! Iâ€™m a plant!
      I did run through all the Canticles Chromaic while you were sleeping, and boy are my fronds tired! Gave me a few new jokes, though! Mind if I test 'em out? You don't mind, right? You don't.
      So: what did the three Mechanimists say when they discovered the Six Day Stilt?
      'Well, well, well!' Geddit?
      Okay, so why is Bethesda Susa so noisy? Because the Temple is so 'rock-us'!
      Nothin'? Tough crowd.
      This is worse than the time I did a set for a bunch of urshiib. I really 'bara-threw-em' for a loop!
      We breaking camp already? Nice! Where are we headed? Hey, let's stock up on water and hit the salt pans. I've always wanted to go. The 'Moghra'yi' hear about it, the 'Moghra'yi' love it! But then I met one of the locals and let me say, Issachari? More like he's-a scary!
      Ha ha, you're walking a little fast there, bud! Wait for old Frondzie!
    

The owls are not what they seem.
The spectral gleam!
There! Across the psychic sea!
To say I 'see'
is not quite right.
It's not quite sight.
It is older.
From the time before heat burst from a point, and showered the cosmos in light.
It was colder.
Oblivion stretched across and through the borders of unending night,
As if in a dream.
They're not what they seem.

It's the custom among patricians that first-born children, slated to inherit nothing of their families' estates, venture out of numb Ibul into the wide world, and that -- in the case of the Iuto family -- they shove off with the companionship of their household's foremost hound. So it came to be that Octadius, grown by manhood into a spiteful wreck, pledged his intention to cross bleak Arthax with his canine Hylaeus, who himself harbored no desire to abandon his lamplighted streets, but -- lacking the rights afforded to dogs in other parts of the world -- was forced to obey. And when Octadius, who cherished courage more than sense, found himself impaled on the fossilized stinger of a manscorpion, Hylaeus could do little more than look on with irritation at his own new predicament, and ponder how he might finish crossing the desert with his life in tow. By a hound's luck, though, several days of vexed wandering were rewarded with the company of a dromad caravan, which saw him safely to the white dunes of the East, and from there, to a curious land called Qud.

Excerpt from Across Moghra'yi, Vol. II: Athenreach by the Baccata Yewtarch

The Eustace-Suttan monastery at Athenreach is one of the largest communities of disciples of the Eustace-Sutta outside of the Hanging Hills. It was founded in 114PP by the pilgrim-monk Umay, who blessed the location as sacred because it lay along the path of the prophet Uuchal's pilgrimage toward Iber.

The monastery houses two hallowed artifacts of the Eustace-Sutta discipline: the Scrolls of One Priam, discovered and transcribed by the monastery's erstwhile abbot Flavian the Learned, and the presumptive hide of Iopinax, the great three-headed mountain goat on which Uuchal's is said to have ridden to the waterfall at Iber and whose hide was so tough that it was said to later protect Uuchal from starfire along the Black Stair after the goat's death. 


*scribbled in the margin* ..mumbles of an Iopinax sighting on the Bowl of Iris. Perhaps a descendant of the famed goat?? Damn those Inscrutable Mouths!
    

Qruu-kas had done just as the folio had instructed him: grease the motor, clean the needle, fill the pipe with ink. He'd spent from harvest dawn to the peaking of the high salt sun stitching the outline into his skin, then coloring the in-between space, until the picture on his forearm echoed the image in his head: top-down view of a tiny, green frog. And so it was with utter bewilderment that he woke the next day at jeweled dusk from a lazy nap to find the picture erased, vanished from his arm, as if he hadn't spent months saving spare drams for the instructional folio, acquiring the tattoo gun, and building up the courage to stitch the mark into his skin. He stared at his naked arm in a broad stupor and may have continued forever if he hadn't heard a low croak from the floor across the dusty room. He moved his eyes, and his astonishment was replaced with a newer and brighter astonishment. Before him, as unthinkable as it was, a tiny, live, green frog hopped onto the baseboard. In his amazement Qruu-kas let out an exotic noise from his chest and mouth, a high-pitched "lyyyyy!", and threw himself into the air. The frog barely twitched an eye before hopping out of the room. 

Qruu-kas, to his credit, did not give chase but instead rushed to his tattoo gun to stare in wonderment. Before he next blinked, he was already refilling the ink. 
    

*ribbit*
*ribbit*!
*croak*
*croak*!
*ribbit*
*ribbit*!
*croak*
*croak*!
*ribbit*
*ribbit*!
*croak*
*croak*!
*ribbit*
*ribbit*!
*croak*
*croak*!
*quetzal*

Once, she had a good steady job.

She lived at the bottom of a pit, and every so often her roommates would throw down a very angry person wearing heavy plate armor. Her self-appointed job, which she took very seriously, was to peel off all of that armor and eat the angry human. Every once in a while, one of her roommates would climb down into the pit to collect the armor, clean up any mess she left, and pet her carapace.

It was a fantastic gig, but sometimes good things don't last.

One day, the loyal beetle woke up to the death grip of suffocation, for her pit had collapsed. As she was very strong and very determined, she dug her way to the surface only to discover a scene of ruin. Her roommates were dead and stripped of gear. Their murderers were long gone.

She wanders now, free but aimless.
    

Glory to Shekhinah, friend. Now I wasn't always a pious man, you know. In fact, I used to despise chrome gadgetry. Then one day, while picking through a sumptuous mound of trash in a fulcrete cavern, I heard a loud series of stomps that jostled me out of my boots. I ran, rounded a wide passage, and came face to face with a bloody rhinox. Now that ain't fair! Ye ain't supposed to be here! I bellowed, but the beast didn't care much. I sighed and muttered a prayer to the trash gods I worshiped, and the big boy charged. Suddenly, a bizarre contraption chirped, shot a beam of light at big boy, and miniaturized 'im! I couldn't believe my eyes! From that day forth, I was tethered to the Kasaphesence and the Argent Fathers who protect her.

As for big boy -- or Uthabatafah, as I call 'im (it means 'little hoof', heh) -- why, he was still furious. Banged my knee up kind of bad. Eventually he stormed off. I bet he's still out there, you know, kicking up dust in an adorable fury.

Live and drink, water-sib.

I am called Ichashioh Elimuth.

There are no more words for us, wanderer.

Moon King! Live and drink, pilgrim.

Ah!

Tell me, friend, was it the picture of wonder as I see it in my mind's eye? Were you beauty-struck by its truths?

So it's true! O Argent Fathers, how far-reaching your works!

... and my trinket? Did you cast it into the Sacred Well?

Moon and Sun! The Argent Fathers bless us, our paths are chromed and glistering.

You have my thanks, friend. Bel shield you.

Oh, I am leaden with this knowledge. Yet am I soothed by your pilgrimage.

Moon and Sun, I feel the warmth of the Kasaphescence yet. Praise the Argent Fathers.

Oh, how your words rasp my soul, friend. You abrade me.

Let us speak no more.

So you have seen the truth? Great are the machinations of our Argent Fathers!

Our meeting, a tiny Canticle. Fate dances in our shadows by their will and word.

Moon and sun, what a day! What a fine day. Praise Shekhinah!

Wh-

My heart's sheen wanes to hear this of you. You abrade me, friend, I am scuffed.

What of my trinket, then? Did you cast it into the... hole in the ground?

Well... the light of the Kasaphescence yet glimmers through your rasping edge.

I must, then, thank you.

My stomach lurches and quavers at the shock of this knowledge.

If there is a lesson in your disregard, I will meditate upon it in my own time.

Let us speak no more.

Ah, a pit opens under my stomach!

Let us speak no more, I beg you. You scuff me. Live and drink.

Wanderer and friend! Have you journeyed yet to the Stilt, and seen the Sacred Well?

Wanderer! Do you venture northwise? Into the Great Desert and nearer the Six Day Stilt?

Ah! The great Mechanimist temple of glass, the sacred offering Well, and history in stone relief. Peopled by the Argent Fathers, in statue and light sculpture. And circled by the grand bazaar. I hear there are more people there than numbers in the void, and their chatter makes a sound wholly raw and new to the world.

Will you go there, and take my bauble? Will you offer it at the Well, where I cannot?

Yes! My neighbor-kin tire of the tale. I was scything the vine when the flat of my blade turned something loose from the soil. My heart has stirred before at the sight of chrome, but to free a small splinter myself, to slide a bead on the abacus of Beauty...

Will you go, then? And offer my bauble at the Well?

I am no rector, understand, but They are the molders of chrome. The gods under Shekhinah who wrought metal edifices from the raw Kasaphescence.

Will you go?

I would ask you make an offering at the sacred Well of my bauble. Moon and sun, I beg you!

Friend, I would be a smoldering heap, cooked to death by the ray of a dawnglider! I would be a slug-riddled corpse by the rifles of the Issachari!

There is no kindness in the Great Desert, and little more in the canyons. I cannot go and live.

Moon and sun, friend! You have my deep and many-sided thanks. Here, take the trinket now. And if you're to ever return, let us visit again.

Live and drink!

Yes! My neighbor-kin tire of the tale. I was scything the vine when the flat of my blade turned it loose from the soil. My heart has stirred before at the sight of chrome, but to free a small splinter myself, to slide a bead toward the beam on the abacus of Beauty...

Will you go, then? And offer my bauble at the Well?

Yes! My neighbor-kin tire of the tale. I was supping on summer offal when I noticed something glinting in the guts. My heart has stirred before at the sight of chrome, but to free a small splinter myself, to slide a bead on the abacus of Beauty...

Will you go, then? And offer my bauble at the Well?

Friend, I would be a smoldering heap, cooked to death by the ray of a dawnglider! I would be a slug-riddled corpse by the rifles of the Issachari!

There is no kindness in the Great Desert. I cannot go and live.

Yes! My neighbor-kin tire of the tale. I was wrenching moisture from a banner when I kicked something 'neath the salt. My heart has stirred before at the sight of chrome, but to free a small splinter myself, to slide a bead on the abacus of Beauty...

Will you go, then? And offer my bauble at the Well?

Friend, I would be a smoldering heap, cooked to death by the ray of a dawnglider! I would be a slug-riddled corpse by the rifles of my kinsfolk!

There is no kindness deep in the Great Desert. I cannot go and live.

Yes! My neighbor-kin tire of the tale. I fished it out a mound of pig stool. My heart has stirred before at the sight of chrome, but to free a small splinter myself, to slide a bead on the abacus of Beauty...

Will you go, then? And offer my bauble at the Well?

Live and drink, Moon King. Come, sit with me.

-mm. Mmm? Friend?



Live and drink. Come in- come sit 'neath the cool shade, 'cross a pillow there. And welcome to Joppa.

You may drink of our freshwater, too, and quench your thirst.

-this? The oasis-hamlet. 'Neath the shelf of the world. A million breaths of salt the wind heaves over the Great Salt Desert Moghra'yi. And to the east, the rotting jungles of Qud.

Here in the crack between the two, watervine can grow, and we grow it. mmm, friend.

-mm, there? Land slopes up and is toothed in chrome steeples, ageless things. Looming over the old-earth tunnels, pillowed in rotting jungle and fungus groves. And broken against the mounts of the north, they are, in the shadow of the Spindle...

There are people, friends, communities. And friends-to-noone, too. History is thick as the high salt sun, friend, and where the past is ground up like matz meal, a mix of life sets in.

-mm, adventurous ones set off for their own splinter of artifact. To both Fates, life and death...

-here? Speak to my daughter through the east door, for herbs. And sitting Tam in the southeast has all manner of trinket, against his chests o' drawers.

-mm, work? The farmers are plagued by cave vermin. You might speak to Mehmet o' there, by the southern watervine patch.

And Argyve, too, friend. The tinker. Always looking for trinkets to wire between, heh. Go through his hut of sheet metal, to the southwest.

-mm, work? Try Argyve, friend. The tinker. Always looking for trinkets to wire between, heh. Go through his hut of sheet metal, to the southwest.

-ahh, mm, such spectacle. The statues within, a revelation to the eyes. Chandlers enough to drain your skins dry 'twixt Shallows and Beetle Moon.

-mm, Barathrumites. Strange draft o'those bearfolk. They, mm, hah. They care not overly for outsiders. I hope Argyve sold you not a better welcome than you'll have.

-this? Oh? Oh...



Warted leg? mm. Foul smell of sour gum? mmm. Moon and sun....

A girshling? This is a girshling.

Creature of plague, friend. mmm. This one...



This one covered in slick and muscled out the bilge hose of sleeping Agolgot, in the cave under the Cloaca...

-mm, but here? Girshling this far west? There must be hundreds for one to reach... mm, does the Gyre widen again??

-mm, plagues. Of our great grandsires many-times-over. Salt, darkness, svardym-frog... Girshling.

-mm, friend. Do not like to sour the air with a harsh word! But this tiding bites my liver like acid. mm, must ask Nima for an elixir of yuckwheat...

-mm, oh? In dyed robes, flashing gestures of hand? And ranting about pipe milk? A gyre wight, must be. They about worship the Girsh nephilim as gods.

-mm, nephilim. Seventh plague. Girsh titans born on the Moon Stair, and quickened to life to eat our young. Sultan Resheph drove them back a chiliad ago, away to slumber. mm, do they rouse?

-mm, oh? A gyre wight, must be. They bind the teeth right up to their own gums, to make a show for the Girsh nephilim.

-mm? No, friend! Your finding is rich in value to us. We are poor farmers, and sharpen our vinereapers is all we can do. But others? Perhaps more.

Take these prickly-boons as thanks. mm, I will not soon forget this, Moon King. Leave me now to muse, kindly...

-mm, yes? Plagues, a chiliad old. Seven such: girshlings, darkness. mm, svardym-frog...

Ah, nephilim, too, friend. Girsh titans who eat the young of kith and kin. Sultan Resheph drove them under the earth, but do they stir??

-mm, oh? You're wondering if they might come to Joppa, then?

mm, I am for you, Moon King. Any friend of yours is too a friend of Joppa, and if those friends desire shelter I wouldn't dare turn them away. I only hope these lilypad-folk have the patience for a farmer's life. -mm, not as exciting here as it was in the Palladium Reef.

-mm, blessings upon your generous heart, Moon King. I mean no slight to these slynth, but it is too great a favor you ask of the people of Joppa.

Have you spoken to the slynth, Moon King? I am curious to hear what destination they choose.

-mm, your luminous friends are settling in quite well.

There is yet a pall of ennui among some, but such is the case for any party of brave migrants. Ah, they will find their ground or their path, all in time. Some farmers show some small discomfort but that will pass in time.

-mm, ah, Moon King. Come see how the slynth have become a part of Joppa!

Some cared not for the slow pace of our lives and struck out on their own, and with their thews and wits I have no doubt they will live to find purpose. mm, others are welcome to grow and flourish here in our marshes.

A waterhand? Aye. Live and drink, traveller.

Mehmet, the tongue says. Live and drink, Moon King.

Watervine farm in the lap of the marsh. You've sucked the moisture out a vinewafer, yea? We tend the plant here.

Aye? I have it, then.

Somethin' is eating our watervine, 'round Beetle Moon. Q-ruun says he saw a creature, spider-like, slinking in the brine. But no cave spider would dare get so near Warden's stomps.

I tasted a bit of red fleck in the pool. Shale, like we find in the soil by Red Rock...

Hike there, will you? To Red Rock. Just about two parasangs north of Joppa.

Kill the vermin and bring one's corpse back, for seein' what it is. Elder will take care to pay you after, waterhand.

Oh? Oh. 

Don't like the look o' that thing. Best bring it to Elder. Hut's northwise up the path.

Moon and Sun. Wisdom and will.

human? We are greeted! What do you desire?

It is a pleasure to know this, human friend Moon King! I am Tam.

Joppa is my home, yes.

I walked Moghra'yi in the caravans of my brethren and the saltback, but upon meeting Elder Irudad, knew at once to settle down here. You will understand, friend human, if you speak to him.

I am dromad, human friend. Some say saltstrider. Do you know this?

My people have walked the salt for thousands of years, meeting every creature that lives and thinks. From Pale Sea to the marsh of Joppa, and under the Hanging Hills, our chests are drawn.

Psst!

Hey, can I interest you in some Consortium wares?

Called Yrame, Warden a-Joppa. I kill trouble. Don't be trouble.

Nigh every settlement a-Qud keeps a Warden. We snuff threats to the peace.

Out East? Uegh. Wouldn't go, I. Git ta Qudzu. Like as rust the pauldrons right off a-shoulders.

Up North? En't far. See them baboons, you put one's light out for me.

Don't say? Well. Fates favor your feet, hyeh.

If you don't get dry-roasted by the fire snakes, ought be a time of times. Better hit all the food stalls for samples, hyeh?

Donâ€™t let your nostrums run dry on the road. I have what you need.

Witchwood for pain, bandages for bleeding, yuckwheat and honey for when your guts act up. Coldcaps when I can find them. Why not take a look?

I grew up right here in Joppa, daughter of the Elder and all. Spent some years delving, but gave it up after a few near escapes and nearly deadly wounds. Iâ€™m better suited to herbalism anyway, and my father worries less.

Fates forfend. I would hardly like to lead a village and run a shop at the same time.

Spread starapple on yer matz! It's proof against thirst and harm alike.

Now don't you go breaking my fence.

You ever run into one of these in the wild? The lengths some folks will go for a crab leg!

Leeches. Blood. If that's what you want, I got what you want.

Please don't open the gate.

Bless this mess and bless you, friend.

Step in. Take shelter from the salt.

Goat meat keeps good. Buy some afore you head back to the salt.

Come to see my beasts? All hale and well-fed, I assure you.

Oh, look. It is a not-bear. Greetings, not-bear.

Nnnngggh.

I might be willing to trade.

ahahahaa!

Be respectful of the red-and-white and we will get along.

Live and drink, traveler. Show mercy to a weary pilgrim.

Be quick about it.

Live and drink, traveler. Welcome to the Stilt.

You are among friends here, pilgrim. Stay peaceful.

Then you're not of the faith yourself, huh? Me neither. Do go inside, though. She's a beauty. Got dyed glass high in her rafters, she does. And two marvelous carvings on the wings. Plus a light-sculpture of a god. Hear the sermon, too, as you like. The high priest is persuasive, but not half as persuasive as the cathedral herself. In beauty there is power, you know.

Either way, while you're in the cathedral or on the Stiltgrounds, stay peaceful.

Aye, aye. The clamor of it all can overwhelm.

The glowcrows say 'twas a bird-god who taught folks to gather like this, in large flocks. So blame birds.

Who knows? I've wondered it myself. Sometimes she'll catch my eye, when the moon's silver-bright, and she's there bearing down on the flats.

Whatever she is, she's gigantic. And old. Real old. Way older than the cathedral the Mechanimists built inside her.

Are you mad? You think I keep a tally of every shopkeeper that steps foot on the Stiltgrounds? They come and go as they please. You've got merchants of all types here. Winesellers, honey hawkers, bookbinders, cobblers.

Have a look around for yourself. Following the road around the Stilt. There's tents the whole way round.

Live and learn, wanderer. Have you come across any books or scrolls in your travels? Do you care to donate one to the cathedral library? Whenever you return, you may speak to me and read anything you've donated.

You imagine they will thrive here at the Stiltgrounds, among the faithful?

This wouldn't be the first time the Stiltgrounds have hosted refugees, Moon King, and make no mistake: it is a burden upon the church, Catechists and Protectors in particular. But your words echo loud in our hearts as our hallways. Some in our number will see the slynth as the chosen of chosen, and if I speak to them first, everyone else will take it as Shekhinah's will. Which, arguably, it would be. Tell the slynth that the Mechanimists will have them.

I mean no slight to these slynth folk, Moon King, but the Stiltgrounds have hosted refugees before and it is a substantial burden upon our stewards. Our resources and space are scant, and I must request that you find another home for them. May the Kasaphescence shine upon them, and you, in this endeavor.

Moon King, bless you. Have you brought tidings of the slynth?

Praise be to Shekhinah, Moon King, your slynth friends are hard workers and quick learners!

I can't help but feel a bit concerned at their ethic, and who in the church might take advantage of it. I hope to foster an interest in reading in them if I can, before they are taught incuriosity. Perhaps a book club?

Live and learn, Moon King.

The slynth are settling in as folk do. I see some flank the Priests and Catechists with empty eye, but some have proven hungry for knowledge. I have established a weekly Canticle study group, and its numbers grow each meeting.

Praise be to Shekhinah for this meeting, Moon King.

Oh, we're in but the first phase of its foundation. The church has amassed a splendid collection of scripts through the years. Glorious Shekhinah, praise be upon Him, gifted us with several caches. The eremites work day and night reproducing them in the scriptorium, and I have taken it upon myself to beseech travelers, for the rarest finds often come from the least likely places.

You share the pessimism of my kin, and several of the priests as well. My heart hears you, but listen to my words, and maybe you will come to feel as I do.

To devalue wisdom is to devalue the Kasaphescence. She shines in the void, refracting light, illuminating those around her. So does the written wisdom of our elders.

The machinery of chromium is complex in its divinity. Don't we do a disservice to our Fathers when we remain ignorant of it, of our past, of our future? Don't we deserve the joy of knowing? Bless Eschelstadt II, first Child, for he believes as I do.

Peace and health in the light of the Star, pilgrim. Brood with me on the life of Resheph, if you are willing.

A spiritual patron of kith and kin, who did so much for us, and who leads me and others like me to the path of healing. For, above all, he was a healer. He dressed the wounds of the sick and rid the land of the plagues of the Gyre.

He was also a sultan, but he was the last sultan. He unbricked the walls of monocracy so we could pick berries in the orchards they hid.

A quiet shrine to the Coiled Lamb, centuries old. Tucked away here, outside the marble parapets and cloaked in the dust of time, it's lost to those who'd sneer at the veneration of Resheph over other fathers.

Step inside and voice a prayer, if you are willing.

These books can weather the salt and jungle alike.

Everything I sell is the product of many hours of toil.

We'd all be dead without bees, you know.

Take out what you've busted and I'll jury-rig it for a fair price.

Unfinished schematics are obviously not for sale. Everything else is.

If you came for the humble pie, you had best not have led any mind-hunters here.

You don't look so good. You need more yuckwheat and honey in your diet.

Cookbooks are best named from the heart. Those who ridicule the name of a cookbook have lost their sense of wonder.

Nothing sadder than a cookfire and nothing to cook over it.

Ah, friend, please come in.

Live and drink, and collect, and combine...

I recommend everything I carry. Not all at once, of course.

Kill anyone valuable?

Live and drink, friend.

Hello, hello, friend, let's get your weary feet covered.

Live and drink, friend.

Careful. It's hot.

Light gloves, heavy gloves, gauntlets. Don't let your hands go bare, friend.

Guns, guns, guns! Don't they just make you smile?

Live and drink, friend.

Beautiful baubles and gleaming gemstones over here!

Raw metals and gems buy and sell for a fixed water-cost.

...exceeding mass thresholds, perhaps a ganglionic teleprojector fitted with suspensors...

Oh, I didn't notice you there. That's because I was ignoring you.

...waste heat from the thermo cask? Or centrifugal extraction to the p-density of sunslag...

...unexpected deviation from the Klanq constant.



Must you bother me? What are you, some sort of waterfreak? Faundren-eyed pilgrim? Arconaut? Make yourself useful and fetch me a knickknack from one of the caves, then. I may "reward" you.

There are caves everywhere, you dolt! Scoop the surface of the marsh, or head on east to the rust wells, or wander into the Desert for all I care...

You're standing in my light! What do you want?

Ah, mmm, hmmm. Are you a useful one, after all? Go fetch me another!

Impressive, you! Maybe you're fit to poke around my workshop and swap scrap with me. I have been wanting another apprentice. So unfortunate about Skref, what with the disembowelment and all. Take a seat, there.

Now, to screw the nut on the bolt with an explanation! I'm on the cusp, you see. A grand discovery. The Weirdwire Conduit is near assembled, and once it is, we'll be able to chat with anyone... in instant time! from here to the Yd Freehold. But before I can finish, I need wire. As much as you can find... at least two hundred feet. You should be able to scavenge it from the rust wells.

The wire! Give it to me!

Yes, yes! Beautiful wire! -oh, before I forget, I repaired an old recoiler for you. Use it whenever you wish to hop back to Joppa quickly. Now, give me a few moments to attach the wire...

It's working! Genius! Genius! Noise in the static- I hear it! I hear!... what's this? What *is* that? Wait...

It's repeating itself...

Apprentice! Come, here! Something strange is occurring. The Conduit is picking up a signal, some sort of repeating transmission. I cannot decipher it, however. I lack cryptogull eggs and, well, never you mind! I have a great task for you, my apprentice. Do you accept it?

-yes. You must seek out Barathrum the Old, the eldest and wisest tinker alive. He lives with his followers the Barathrumites under the arch of Grit Gate to the northeast, in the jungle-strangled ruins of Qud. He will know what to make of the signal.

Disciples of Barathrum. Mostly urshiib, like their mentor- quilled albino bears who prefer their candle-dim caves to the sun-salted surface of the jungle. A thousand years ago Barathrum and his kin crossed the Homs Delta into the rusting heart of Qud. He has spent centuries peeling the chrome shells off time's artifacts in his workshop. If he cannot decipher the signal, no one can.

Splendid! Perfect! Let me record the signal to disk, which you'll need to guard with your life, I'm afraid.

I'll rig up a droid scrambler for you, too. You see, the Barathrumites have programmed a troupe of waydroids to guard the approach to Grit Gate. With the scrambler, you'll needn't worry about them. Wait there.

Here you are. Now, go! Off with you! May you live long enough to do my bidding. Away, away!

Apprentice.

My apprentice! What?

Do they? Yes, yes, Otho might. Hmm.



Well.



Good luck!

Did they, now? Well you're not MY delver!

Grit Gate is not Joppa, you pridesome solder-nail, and in this house you are apprentice still.

Now, what did you want? Be quick!

-what?

No, no, I'm far too engrossed to see to your curiosity. I'm sure the Barathrumites have something for you to do.

Welcome to Grit Gate. I am Otho, Barathrum's steward. I apologize for the manner of our introduction, but we must take precautions. Qud is a very unforgiving place.

You demonstrate tremendous promise to have returned from Golgotha with such inexperience. Take this firearm as your reward. It bears the mark of our finest gunsmith, Sparafucile. Take this bracelet, as well.

Return when you are ready to discuss the signal.

Welcome to Grit Gate. I am Otho, Barathrum's steward. I apologize for the manner of our introduction, but we must take precautions. Qud is a very unforgiving place.

I am pleased to see that you've returned with the waydroid, though you still know little of the dangers you bear. Take this firearm as your reward. It bears the mark of our finest gunsmith, Sparafucile.

Return when you are ready to discuss the signal.

Welcome to Grit Gate. I am Otho, Barathrum's steward. I apologize for the manner of our introduction, but we must take precautions. Qud is a very unforgiving place.

You are worthy to study with us. Take these.

Return when you are ready to discuss the signal.

It takes more than a willing spirit to be trusted here, wayfarer.

Prove your worth and bring us a waydroid, and we will have more to speak of.

Are you ready to discuss the signal?

The signal is a repeat transmission being broadcast from an unknown source. It's been live for over a year. One of our tinkers, Q Girl, discovered it while rigging a long wave detector. Unfortunately, it's encrypted, and we do not have the means here to decrypt it. You may be of some help in this matter, however.

We've long known the location of a fully functioning baetyl within the bowels of the great hall Bethesda Susa. The Mechanimists have consecrated the site around it and built a temple there. Q Girl claims to have developed a means to decrypt the signal, but she needs the computing power of the baetyl. If you can infiltrate the Mechanimist compound, you may be able to engage the baetyl and decode the signal.

They are antique stones located in certain places deep within the caverns of Qud. We believe they are some sort of hyper-advanced machines built by the Eaters. Often one claims to possess a sentience of its own. However, most of them have gone haywire in the eons since their creation; it is rare indeed to discover one whose circuitry is wholly uncorroded.

The Mechanimists worship this one as an idol, and they will protect it at all costs. You will need to find a way through their host to the baetyl itself.

Do you believe you can accomplish this task?

Good, delver. Speak to Q Girl in the workshop. She'll encode her instructions for the baetyl onto a copy of the disk.

There's one more thing. The baetyl is located beneath the ancient cryobarrios of the Eaters. Time has worked to erode the mechanisms that contain their cryogenic mist. That freezing vapor billows out of the chambers freely now, cooling the entire cavern. You will want to procure warm clothing to protect yourself.

The spoils of the Mechanimists are yours to keep. Remember, delver, Barathrum will look kindly upon your service.

Luck be with you in the lair of Bethsaida, delver.

You return. Have you succeeded in decoding the signal?

Well done, delver. Present the disk.

I must bring the decoded signal to Barathrum immediately. Return in a few hours. By then I'll have discussed our next course of action with Barathrum and will have further instructions for you.

Delver, I have no further instructions for you yet. Return soon.

Moon King, I've brought the decoded signal to Barathrum, and he's finished musing on it. We have fresh instructions for you, delver. Are you ready to hear them?

Barathrum needs you for an undertaking of great importance. You must journey to Omonporch far to the north. There the Spindle stretches from earth to sky. Unfortunately, a troublesome merchant from the Consortium of Phyta has relocated there and declared xerself Earl of Omonporch. We need you to broker a deal so that we may lease control of the Spindle. Failing that, you'll need to dispose of the self-appointed Earl.

Be careful on your approach to Omonporch, delver. So far east into the reaches of Qud, the Putus Templar lie in wait.

The Putus Templar, or the Sons and Daughters, as they call themselves, are an order of knights who claim descendancy from the Eaters, the ancient folk who wrought the chrome halls of Qud. Beware them, for while they despise all mutants, they harbor a special malice for Barathrum.

Take care that you do not find yourself inside one of their slave pens.

That will be revealed to you in due time.

Do not forget your place, delver.

It's as I feared, Moon King. Grit Gate is being assailed. The Putus Templar must have followed you back from Omonporch.

Let us use the precious little time we have before they arrive to prepare our defenses.

Go to the mainframe room and scan the shale surrounding Grit Gate for anomalies. Now, Moon King!

With the chrome key card I gave you, you now have access to our power grid. There are chain laser emplacements and force projectors across the enclave. Use Ereshkigal's reconnaissance to decide which defenses to enable. You can also broadcast an overclock command or activate Rodanis Y by interfacing with Ereshkigal.

Be mindful of the amperage draw, though. If you overdraw the grid, you could cause brownouts.

Act quickly, Moon King! The Templar near us even as we speak.

That rumbling... what was it? An explosion? Hmm...

Grave thoughts, Moon King. Listen to me now. Take this key card, go to Ereshkigal's room, and-- oh, that's the mainframe. It's what she prefers to be called.

Go to her room, access Ereshkigal, and scan the shale surrounding the enclave for anomalies. I've asked her to ready her sensors.

Update me with what you learn. You may use the intercom in the northeast corner of Ereshkigal's room to deliver your update.

Go, quickly! I'd soon be disabused of my fears.

You can still activate our defenses, Moon King. There are chain laser emplacements and force projectors across the enclave. Use Ereshkigal's reconnaissance to decide which defenses to enable. You can also broadcast an overclock command or activate Rodanis Y by interfacing with Ereshkigal.

Be mindful of the amperage draw, though. If you overdraw the grid, you could cause brownouts.

Have you secured the Spindle yet?

Leave me alone for a moment, delver. I have duties to attend.

That is sterling news, delver. I'll go inform Barathrum straightaway.

Furthermore, I spoke with Barathrum. He praised your handling of the Earl of Omonporch, and he thanks you for the bravery you exhibited in defending Grit Gate.

The attack today reminds us: for too long have we put our faith in the isolation of our guild and the preoccupations of the Putus Templar. The looming threat of another attack impels Barathrum to accelerate his plans, and with them, your position in our guild.

You are raised to Disciple, friend. Barathrum wishes to speak with you immediately.

I spoke with Barathrum. He praised your handling of the Earl of Omonporch, and he thanks you for the bravery you exhibited in defending Grit Gate.

The attack today reminds us: for too long have we put our faith in the isolation of our guild and the preoccupations of the Putus Templar. The looming threat of another attack impels Barathrum to accelerate his plans, and with them, your position in our guild.

You are raised to Disciple, friend. Barathrum wishes to speak with you immediately.

Yes, delver. Take this key and follow the stairs down to his study. He awaits.

Yes, delver. Follow the stairs down to his study. He awaits.

I am busy, wayfarer. Please talk to Mafeo in the trade square if you need something.

Delver! You have my deepest gratitude. Few humans could have defended Grit Gate so deftly.

Now, give me time to assess our losses and consult with Barathrum. Return soon.

Moon King, I've assessed the losses we suffered in the attack.

No robots perished, no books were burned, no bookshelves were destroyed, no crops were ruined, no gadgets were shattered, and no pieces of furniture were destroyed.

Given the circumstances, this is a remarkable lack of destruction. Your defense of Grit Gate was first-class, Moon King.

Moon King, I've assessed the losses we suffered in the attack.

No robots perished, no books were burned, no bookshelves were destroyed, no crops were ruined, no gadgets were shattered, and no pieces of furniture were destroyed.

Much was lost, but such is what I expected. Once again, thank you for efforts, Moon King.

Moon King, I've assessed the losses we suffered in the attack.

No robots perished, no books were burned, no bookshelves were destroyed, no crops were ruined, no gadgets were shattered, and no pieces of furniture were destroyed.

Such tremendous loss. I wonder if more could have been done to prevent it.

Yes, Moon King?

Be straightforward, disciple. You mean to ask if we will house them.

I am uncertain that you know the enormity of what you ask me, Moon King. Nonetheless, I cannot deny what you have done for our order. These slynth must be tested as you were, but should they show the mettle and drive set by your example, we will accept them as apprentices.

You have grown bold beyond your station. What you have asked of us you have not earned. If you must ask again, become worthier first.

Has this slynth situation been settled yet?

I did not expect to admit this, disciple, but the refugees have met my expectations. Like you, they have shown more than a willing spirit in work and curiosity both.

The slynth have promise, and you may have been right to bring them to us.

Live and drink, disciple.

You will be pleased to know that the slynth have proven themselves worthy of apprentice status. They will reside here for as long as they uphold and serve the tenets of our order.

Quetzal! Who are you, stranger?

It's time to fight, Moon King. Are you with me?

Quetzal, quetzal, quetzal! Welcome to the workshop, friend.

Yikes! Yes! The intensity was too great to be the result of one of my experiments. What was it, I wonder?

It's a word I say out of excitement. Sort of a semantic extension of the feeling I get when I see a quetzal. Oh, a quetzal is a pretty bird in the trogon family. I tend to incorporate things I like into my idiolect.

Quetzal! Thank you, thank you. What a poetic metaphor! You're a regular Shakesprig, aren't you?

Yes, yes, yes. They are so quetzal!

Oh, oh! Quetzal! A wave shortener for the short wave detector, a frustum pully for the ion lathe, a thrice-retrothreaded M-band, a...



...and a dissertation on the illegitimacy of power. Quetzal!

I do, brave friend. I'll imprint them now.

Here they are, brave friend. Good luck!

Should you be here, child?

Is that you, nestling Moon King? Are you returned from gate and Tomb? Come closer, I say.

You appear... refreshed. My old eyes spy the swim lines of the waking world and to you they cede precedence. A newness obtains.

It is. For reasons I will explain shortly, for reasons beyond any of our remits, Klanq has returned to Grit Gate.

Unusual circumstances have put my study in disarray. Lamentable, this is, but necessary.

I am confident there is a richness of wisdom in the poetry of that statement. One day, I will be eager to discover it. For now, what of the Spindle?

You are ever a courier of bright tidings, Moon King. I am fond of this fact.

Categories and types are decohering in these historic times. Nonetheless, the ritual nourishes us. You are raised to Meyvn, Moon King. The one who understands.

Take this, too. A chute of morphing gel from my personal collection. You've arrayed yourself in the artifacts of time, and so we have little left to give you. But still, this may be useful.

Now, matters have... evolved... in your absence. Do you choose now to learn more?

High on the mount above Omonporch, the Putus Templar watch us through their war lenses and prepare an attack. The nephilim, too, stir from their cradles on the Moon Stair and slump with infernal purpose. The short of this is, due to a dearth of prep time and inadequate armament, Pax Klanq no longer believes in the viability of Q Girl's climber design. We must take Klanq at its word, here...

This disheartens us, but there is another hope. Klanq has offered up a new design, something unconventional at all angles. And, despite our early misgivings, Q Girl and I now work in assistance to the project...

A new creature struggles to be born, Moon King, and you will help birth it. Then, it will carry us, you and I, to the top of the Spindle.

Pax Klanq will mold the creature from raw bioelectrical materials. You must gather these entrails: the body as a model, the catalyst to charge the sanguine fluid, the atzmus as deistic direction, the armament for protection, and the hamsa for personality. You will bond with the creature, too, and act as its pilot. So you must speak an incantation to inscribe the connection.

You'll also need to procure the sanguine fluid itself. And, too, a power source shielded from electromagnetic attacks.

They are the components that we will grow, shape, and solder into the ascendant being. We can delve into specifics once you begin, at which point Pax Klanq can also serve as a source of knowledge.

As you acquire components, bring them to the mound of scrap and clay over by Klanq.

They are the components that we will grow, shape, and solder into the ascendant being. Ask Pax Klanq for details.

As you acquire components, bring them to the mound of scrap and clay over by Klanq.

Correct. The creature will be shaped broad enough to contain two, but only you will be bonded to it. Only you will pilot.

Don't fear over an inescapable tether, though. The creature will be mobile unpiloted, if slower to act.

Primordial soup, to be catalyzed and ran through its arteries as the animating substance.

Yes, the question of power is a trickier one. Our standard power sources might suffice, but they would be vulnerable to electromagnetic attacks on the ascent, and we believe it within the competency of the Putus Templar to execute such an attack.

This leaves us two options. Klanq and Q Girl have worked out a design for a neutronic battery, free from vulnerabilities on the EM spectrum. But it requires 3 drams of neutron flux. The alternative is remote power, but to carry us across the Spindle's length the source would have to be extraordinary. I would look to Chavvah, the Tree of Life, for a psychic quickening. Reports tell of the resumption of their roaming across the Moon Stair. Seek the trunk at Eyn Roj to begin your investigation, if that's the path you choose.

Yes, Moon King! Begin the gathering, and the molding will follow. The materials you choose will influence the being we create, but any such being will be suitable for ascent.

This is our last task before we make our historic climb, Moon King. Be safe and well in doing it. If you have more questions, return here. Klanq and I will be available.

The creature is born, and you are bonded? What work! You are a sterling shaper of world, Moon King, and I've nothing left to give you but my praise.

Now, our operators at Omonporch confirm that a clash with the Templar is inevitable.

This is a grim fact, but it does give space for your bond to flower. Go, become familiar with leading and piloting your creature. Return when you are ready, and we will finally go starward.

Are you sure, Meyvn Moon King? Our fates are not reversible past the next event horizon.

We go. I-

O! What is it? I heave... I heave the weight of ass across my crutch, but the bones are pullproof. My bones inosculate to this grotto, or rather- this grotto, this world is what my bones *are*. Can an old bear divest of his spine, leave it to mosses and the sunstrung birds?

I... 

No matter. The will can break the wheel, too. We go. Pray, the weightloss of the rise might do good for me. Past the shell of the world, I'm to understand one's burdens can no longer pull them down...

Klanq is able to answer your questions. You received an operating manual, too, no? Perhaps you could reference it.

Come closer, nestling. Let me look upon your countenance.

What can I offer, nestling?

You look... refreshed. Thank you, Moon King. Take this polygel we recently recovered from the Palladium Reef.

What welcome news, delver! Please, take this as a token of my gratitude.

The flywheel of our scheme is spinning, but we must keep our paws on the treadle. Are you ready to learn what comes next?

The climber design relies on the use of electromagnets to interface with the planet's magnetic field and generate torque. Unfortunately, the Spindle generates its own interfering field, perhaps as a mechanism to prevent unwanted ascension.

Our aim is to access the Spindle's control unit and disable the field. How we accomplish this, however, is an enigma. From disparate bits across the archives of the digitum, Ereshkigal has stitched together a cryptic but instructional brocade. She's learned the field can be turned off from a place called Brightsheol, located in the Thin World and accessible only through Resheph's tomb inside the Tomb of the Eaters.

Strange, this, and imprecise, but as tinkers we know: a crude blueprint is better than no blueprint. You must return to Omonporch and enter the Tomb of the Eaters. Once inside, trace the errant paths cut into the mausoleum by robbers and vandals, and ascend to Resheph's burial chamber.

As for gaining entrance to the Tomb, Resheph sealed the gates a thousand years ago, but there's a flaw in the seal. The ancient Mark of Death has been lost to time, but if you were to recover it and incise the mark on your body, the Death Gate would open for you, as it did for countless Eater cadavers in the long-blurred past.

Recover the Mark of Death, Moon King, enter the Tomb, and cross into Brightsheol. Place your paws once again on the dial and drum.

As I'd hoped you would, Moon King. Take this disk with the signal encoded, just in case. And take this tattoo gun for when you recover the Mark of Death. You'll want to bring a pickaxe, too, or some other instrument for digging through stone. And beware: the Tomb is a vast and ancient space, and sacred to many. I cannot speak to what you will experience there.

Strange, this, and imprecise, but as tinkers we know: a crude blueprint is better than no blueprint. You must return to Omonporch and enter the Tomb of the Eaters. Once inside, trace the errant paths cut into the mausoleum by robbers and vandals, and ascend to Resheph's burial chamber.

As for gaining entrance to the Tomb, Resheph sealed the gates a thousand years ago, but there's a flaw in the seal. The ancient Mark of Death has been lost to time, but if you were to recover it and incise the mark on your body, the Death Gate would open for you, as it did for countless Eater cadavers in the long-blurred past.

You're to recover the Mark of Death, Moon King, enter the Tomb, and cross into Brightsheol.

Use the tattoo gun I've given you when you recover the Mark of Death. You'll want to bring a pickaxe, too, or some other instrument for digging through stone. And beware: the Tomb is a vast and ancient space, and sacred to many. I cannot speak to what you will experience there.

So I am, nestling. For a millennium now I've watched the river of Time turn the gears of Qud. I even played my part in diverting the river where I could. Oh, but there have been so many players through the years! So many players.

Little do I remember now, for I was but a cub, a nestling, when my kin and I crossed the Homs Delta into Qud. We were urged on by the flooding of a glacial river that flowed through our hearth-cave. The world was just unthawing then, and I recall the roar of the freezing water as it rushed through the grotto, and the frigid spray on my face as I watched in awe.

That's my dear friend, Euclid. It's a prattleplant. It stores every phrase it hears in its neuroot network, and it mimics speech by flicking its leaves against one another. What comes out is gibberish as often as not, but even so, it's agreeable company for my nights spent tinkering. It is old, perhaps older than I am, and it hasn't yet run out of things to say.

I do. Your service to the guild has been laudable, delver. You braved the vaporous depths of Bethesda Susa and decoded the signal, you secured the Spindlegrounds and handled the self-appointed Earl, and perhaps most materially, you defended our enclave from the Putus Templar.

Since you returned from Bethesda, you've no doubt wondered at the signal's contents. Verily, I hid them to shield you from the weight of the truth. Only Otho, Q Girl, and I bear that burden, but circumstances have changed. The river of Time powers the gear train of our schemes and devices, and it rushes forth. From here, I must share the burden. You must know.

The signal is a beacon of welcoming, and it originates from the top of the Spindle.

The beacon confirmed my hypothesis. The Spindle is an elevator, engineered by the Eaters to convey freight to and from the vault of heaven. You see, nestling, in the earliest aurora of our past, the Eaters of Earth were joined by a great coven of beings that spanned the firmament. But the Eaters succumbed to some terrible temptation, and an injunction was placed on our world.

Since then, the stars were silent to us, and our world was left to molder and decay. But something changed. The signal affirms that an entity roosts atop the Spindle, and invites us to join it.

Dare I say, is the injunction at an end? It's too early to tell, but alas, there could be hope for our world.

I intend to ascend the Spindle and answer the call, delver.

My protege Q Girl has designed a climber for the ascent. We intended to construct it piecewise at the enclave and the site itself, but the engineering feat exceeds even our capacity. With time, I am confident we could accomplish it, but the Putus Templar rob us of our patience. We need to act now, and so as loath as I am to admit it, we need Pax Klanq.

Pax Klanq is an eccentric mushroom prodigy. All their faults aside, they are a brilliant scientist and engineer, and I have little doubt that they could build the climber faster than we could. Several years have passed since we were last in contact, but they owe us a debt, and we must now collect.

Unfortunately, no one knows Pax Klanq's whereabouts. Through contacts I made over the years, I inquired as to their location. The most I was able to garner were these enigmatic instructions:

Seek the heart of the rainbow, eat the god's flesh, and follow the Coral Path.

I must ask you to decipher this enigma, find Pax Klanq, and convince them to construct the climber. Remind Pax of the debt they owe us.

It strikes me as likely for this 'rainbow' to refer to the Rainbow Wood, where Klanq's kin consort, so I suggest you start there.

As I had hoped, delver. First, speak with Q Girl. She'll hand over her design.

I await your return.

Oh. Are you lost, friend?

I don't mind that you're here, but I was not expecting anyone.

Is this it, I wonder?

You're back, I see.

Brightsheol must not have been that interesting, I suppose? Or perhaps you missed me.

I don't know.

Klanq's opacity is alluring, frustrating, and dangerous. Like Klanq, my thoughts on Klanq evade easy explanation.

What you build together will be amazing. Craft well.

These are the final chapters of this story, Moon King, and likely of many stories more too.

It will be well to see the other side of all this, one way or another.

You're going to the Thin World? I confess to some measure of envy.

I have dreamt many times of disappearing into a cool ocean of information, shaking the cruft of my physical form from newly-freed quills. If that came of my waking life, would I then dream as chore-doing Iseppa in her chambers? Perhaps it's best I don't know.

Ah, it is our new short-fingered friend. Set a spell, if you like setting.



Or spells. Or Iseppa. If you like Iseppa, this is a very good place to be.

Thank you, Moon King. I like you too.

Bethesda Susa is an antipodal place, a gallery of life and death and the stages between. Its depths prolong life and end it early, remove life from the flow of days or return it.

It will seek to make you late. Take care you come back on time.

Though I adore the sights and smells of Omonporch, its bug problem becomes distracting.

If I'm to travel there, I always bring something they cannot zip away from.

Yes. That was not the voice of the caverns.

It feels like one of my nightmares come to life at last.

I have not.

I would, however, love to meet him. He seems a fun fungus.

But I daren't go. I fear the sludges.

I fear sludges, the kind you may no longer describe with 'some'. Born of the ancient stuff of existence, possessed of malice and wanting nothing more than to eat whatever they can, and they can eat whatever. It is even worse when they drink.

Take care with them.

I am always tired, friend.

My sleep comes in fits and starts, and always with ghastly visions. Sometimes my rest must be coaxed along with medicine.

No. My nightmares are a concoction of my disordered mind, nothing more. The fumes from this cauldron have nothing to do with the future, save how they affect it.



I'd rather speak of something else, friend.

Mm-hmm.

I would never think to steal from you the delight of forming opinions of my enclave on your own.



Besides, that sounds like rather a lot of talking.

I am Iseppa, and she is me.

I've given thought to being someone else, but never enough to try.

I am contemplating the distinction between animal and rock. Why are they different? How much like a rock must an animal be when it ceases to be an animal?

Yes.

Not yet, but that's not the point.

Who are you? Get out of my work space!

Innovation's sworn enemies have come knocking, Moon King. Let us answer them.

Moon King. Come in. Eat.

Otho has forbidden me from requesting a sample of Klanq. I am to refrain from being puffed on, to cultivate my own!

Are we yet researchers? Is subject consent no longer adequate ethical rigor? Let Klanq puff on Dardi!

Death to all subjugators who dare face us.

Oh? Oh! Do pick up the mopango recipe for bone babka while you're there, won't you? I must know how they make it so dense.

Welcome to my laboratory, Moon King. Rest and sustain yourself before returning to your travels.

Yes! I have braved its wharf in the past, to gather precious convalessence for my experiments.

Are you going? Dress warmly and mind the trolls.

Omonporch is a fine source of bananas, but I have little to say about self-appointed nobility.

Claimed authority has a heady aroma, but no broth beneath it. Let us simply appease Asphodel and leave xem to xyr fantasies.

My air-puffed pastry experiment collapsed thanks to that disturbance.

Whoever is responsible will pay dearly.

I have visited the rainbow wood but once, and there I sampled an array of strange foods, one of which allowed me an unusual lens through which to view the world. It was nothing like I had ever experienced, and I imagined such wondrous recipes. I wrote them all down as best I could, of course.

Sadly, once I returned to my ordinary frame of reference, my scribblings proved impossible to read. So it goes.

What you smell is Grit Gate's signature dish. The Porridge is a recipe passed down through generations of Barathrumites, and it is the food that inspired me to pursue my craft. Yes, outsiders quail at the intensity of the scent, for its flavor is as bold as its effects!

We use cuisine to channel lightning from our bodies! Other recipes may let us breathe fire, or learn the secrets of the Eaters. The Porridge is as precious a part of our legacy as the Barathrum Clock or the foaminator.

Oh, it changes by the hour, sometimes the minute. Preserve this, observe that, add anything, taste everything.

But the starapple of my eye, the Spindle up which I cast my ambitious gaze... is edible vapor. Food that you eat, food that you breathe. Sadly, to date the most I have managed is an herbed saline suspension. Salty air, if you will.

Yes. The flavor, the breathability, all successful, but the barrier between flavor and food is in the calories, and they have yet eluded me. But it is only a matter of time. I am patient, and I am relentless.

I have no need for luck, but I appreciate your well-wishes nonetheless.

May your own endeavors drive you as mine drive me. Did you wish to speak of anything else?

Kitchen? You think this a mere kitchen?

And I suppose the Stilt is a modest church, its great bazaar a junk sale?

Look about you. Every instrument you see is precision-calibrated, every tool handcrafted and built to last. In this room, sustenance and ingenuity come together to evolve cuisine itself, to shape not this culture alone but, over time, every culture. Is that kind of influence the product of a kitchen? Can a simple clay oven in the flower fields do what we do here? Has every kitchen an indelible influence over Qud?



Should they? Should we not all?

But perhaps you are right, friend. Think for a moment.

Every ingredient in the soup of collective knowledge is a valuable one, and who am I to elevate myself over more humble pioneers? But! All the more reason for us to regard cuisine (and by extension, culture itself) to be a scientific endeavor, an ongoing trial-and-error, a blending of what we know and what we don't know, calling upon reality itself to be our guide.

You are more insightful than I realized, Moon King. Thank you for this discussion. Did you need aught else?

I propose an accord, delver: You remove yourself from my sight immediately, and I will refrain from asking that Ereshkigal reduce you to your component atoms.

Not like this. After all we've accomplished...

Ah. It's you again, returning from ever more unreturnable locales. Alive and come to bother the disagreeable urshiib.

I did not consider that my life could be further upturned. Truly, I have learned much and I hate it all.

Once you lot reach the spindle's apex, perhaps you could be convinced to stay there? Or perhaps I could go in your stead.

I spent so long preparing for the eventuality that my home might be breached.

I was not ready. This sense of violation burns like electrocautery.

Good. Shut the sarcophagus door behind you.

Of course it was only a matter of time before you came to speak to me.

I don't suppose I can convince you to let me tend to my duties in peace? I know nothing of interest to a wayfarer. Each of my days is like the others; I maintain and protect my children, and this is enough. If I desire conversation, there is Ereshkigal.

Bethesda Susa is a vibrant and thriving ecosystem in which we have no place. That said, I certainly would not complain if someone were to clear out its Mechanimist infestation.

Should you travel there, watch your step. The fronds of a lurking beth can rapidly exsanguinate fleshy creatures such as we.

I know that Omonporch is a miserable, hot place and Asphodel is a self-important churl.

I don't even like bananas.

Yes, and I fear the worst. Hie to Ereshkigal. She will know what to do.

I have met Pax Klanq. I was puffed on.

Candidly, I prefer fungi edible and inert.

My chromelings, my machines, my crops. I tend to them and they tend to me.

Speaking to other organics is as strenuous to me as any physical exercise.

My reclusiveness is not born of antipathy; I simply cannot converse as easily as you do and don't wish to learn how.

Ereshkigal is the mainframe computer of Grit Gate. She keeps watch through the thin world, as she would put it, while we maintain her presence in the thick world.

I feel as though she and I understand one another.

Child, who are you?

Stay safe, Moon King. Please.

Moon King, you are back! I feared we would lose you in the Tomb, but you look better than well. Perhaps I should have had greater faith, or at least less worry.

Have you visited Barathrum's workshop, by the by? Klanq and Q Girl await you there.

Hie there now. Being tardy with Klanq carries risk, not so much from its offense as from its idle curiosity.

I am further relieved to know of another perspective looking upon this work. Klanq's presence here is vital, but it discomfits me: I cannot help but consider the introduction of chaos to an already chaotic endeavor to be a... conflagratory strategy.

I drink in the sight of you, cub. Thank you for keeping safe.

...  I do not like this.

I know you will go. Please take care where you dig; mopango wanderers say the hot blood of Eater artifice yet runs in the guts of that place.

Drink deeply of life, child. Are you finding your way?

There are pools of convalessence there. You see, when cryogenic mist condenses, it forms a cool, luminous liquid that's restorative if you're able to bathe in it.

Oh! And in one of the ruined wards, the Alchemist keeps their shop. Who's the Alchemist, you ask? A sort of enigmatic figure -- amateur liquid-tinker, poet, merchant. Their methods aren't scientific, but they are useful if you're seeking a specific kind of liquid. Just be careful around them, Moon King.

Nothing other than a pet theory of mine that the Spindle is a liquid in laminar flow.

Yes! I was even provided with a brief premonition of it, as my workbench liquids are sensitive to small vibrations around the enclave.

Oh, yes. You see, years and years ago, we were studying optics in the course of our research into laser technology. Barathrum was giving a lecture to some guest attendees, and...

Oh, I'd rather not talk about it.

Years. Decades on decades. Centuries, perhaps. Most of these wet-earred cubs were merely sketches in their mothers' dreambooks when I arrived to study under Barathrum. We knew so little then, know so little now.

You are sharp, Moon King. In a way that's what I am. But liquids are more willful than scrap. I can't solder them together; they would run away, hide in the shale cracks, slowly come apart and disappear. I moreso think of myself as a wisewoman in dialogue with them -- I manage their moods and phases. My notebooks are full of their quirks and caprices. It's a wonder, isn't it, how at just the right temperature and pressure the continuity of matter is smashed apart? How the gaseous butterfly flits out of the dense worm?

I won't denigrate them, Moon King, or presume to speak for what's in their hearts. But I can direct you around the contours of the impressions they've left on me.

Who would you like to hear about, child?

Larger than life. Paternal. Concerned. The lenses of his eyes are focused on the far points of the world.

Brassy. If you bent him he might snap. The way I treat liquids on my burner, Otho treats the units of the enclave.

Sharp as a tack, and living a life of deep meaning. Inventive and orderly. I can't say I understand his music, but I do love how expressive he is with it.

Oh, I have such a precious vantage point on my sweet neighbor! When he achieves a moment of perfection in his craft -- a flawlessly spiraled barrel, a mound of powder measured to the grain -- he beams like the high salt sun. What a lovely smile.

She explodes like gas and dust in a quiet corner of the galaxy. Radiant. Revolutionary. She's a good listener and companion for supper, which you mightn't expect.

After supper I like to retreat to the library, take a storybook off the shelves, flop down on the chairbear, and lose myself in another world. Many of these worlds feature palaces, markets, gardens, ships. Many of those places have bells. When they do, I always think of Mafeo. More than anyone else, Mafeo could be a character in the bright world of a story, where this dusty place is itself confined to a mere storybook.

Our sleepy sage. So sweet. She calms me. I sit in her room and we muse on the nature of things.

I've instructed Neek since they were a lil' cub. What a strange one! Bouncey. Full of smiles. But brilliant in their own way. My favorite book in all the world is Neek's Spiderwebs on Hoversleds. Who would have ever thought?

Fiery. Blustery. Like the stews he cooks. If you're going to chat with him, make sure you have your schedule cleared and a ewer of honeyed wine.

Precious Shem. They've such a wider view of the world than we do. What a momentous obligation we've created for ourselves, and how I wouldn't undo it!

I've shared my honey with that prickly troglodyte for more years than I can count. I can't help but like him, and while he won't admit it, he feels the same about me.

She's a sphinx! So enigmatic that one. It's not entirely clear if she was there, waiting, when Q Girl succeeded at retreading the mainframe's guts, or if she sparked into being that very moment. Or was it some synthesis of the two?

You're not supposed to be here. But I won't tell.

Should I hide in the library? I believe it's the clever thing to do.

I am sharp. I am handy.

I am glad you are safe, Moon King.

I wonder if the distributed consciousness of a fungal entity is similar to that of a distributed machine mind. I shall ask Father when he is not so busy.

Is... is this a question trick? I suppose I cannot know what you intend. Can I understand you?

What kind words. It seems so with you, too.

Would you like to hear? When I was first put together by Father and friends, I was Shem 2, the second iteration of the make-me project.

As I came along, scampered through the halls, listened to the stories Neek read me, climbed onto Sparafucile's workbench to have my screws replaced, I realized I was not what I could be. And so I downgraded myself to Shem 1.

That has happened three times.

It's unclear to me that I should be.

I am your friend, Moon King.

Who are you? What? Please, do not disturb me.

The Templar are assaulting the enclave? Oh dear, dear...

May our guns' lasers shine with the light of the Kasaphescence.

Why, Moon King, Brightsheol treated you well. There is a new gravity about you; your proverbial boots ring louder in the Annals with each step.

I imagine you're off to Teach's study? They're already at work down there.

I admit a burning curiosity to see the joined imagination of our Q Girl and Pax Klanq, and no doubt yours as well. Watching such a creation burgeon from empty space to fullness of being would be a joyful entry in the chronicles of my life, but...

Too many fingers tangle in the honeypot, as my cubhood mentor would tell me.

Never before had the Templar broken so far through our defenses. We live a new reality now, one harder to weather.

Is there anything you need, Moon King?

My quills prickle with unease to hear you say such things.

Be certain to visit the village of Ezra. The Daughter of Exile who lives there is as good a tinker as any I know, and she always has surplus she's willing to sell.

Light shine through you, friend.

The Temple of the Rock is cut off from the wider world, and I hear the Mechanimist colonists no longer recognize High Priest Eschelstadt. That said, if you are favored by the Mechanimists, if you are welcome in their holy places, then I've no doubt that Phinae Hoshaiah will grant you peaceful entry.

Yea! So you like it? Sheba Hag and I composed it on a wavelathe. We made a series of songs about the birth and life of the Kasaphescence. Together we call them Spun on the Cosmic Loom.

Oh, Sheba Hagadias. She's the librarian at the cathedral of the Six Day Stilt. My water-sister and cohort in chrome.

Beauty manifest, whose chromium shoals are Awe itself. In my belief system, She's the being from whom all metal was birthed, out in the ever-void. There are pieces of Her in every chrome belfry and every machine. Even bits of Her in our own blood.

For me, Her essence extends beyond mere metal. Anything that's ordered, She infuses: a poem, a mathematical proof, a clean workspace... so definitely not Q Girl's.

Of a sort, yes. I'm part of a branch who deify the Kasaphescence only. We believe the argent fathers to be earthly beings: important to the faith's early history but not divine.

Many. Many. This is my third collaboration with Sheba. Our first two collections were called Immaculate Chrome and Outside In.

Oh, it's the silver rondure. It's a mark of devotion to the Kasaphescence.

Don't I know it. I've had to invent eight separate systems of organization to manage them all. At the moment I'm trying out a new one, Harmonices Spiralis. Spiral towers with heights increasing according to the harmonic series of numbers. It's... fine.

The problem is I'm always inscribing more disks. New contraptions. Reverse-engineered artifacts. It's a good problem to have, I suppose.

Take a look. See if any interest you.

We're a vibrant community here. A circle of monks mapping the outer lattices and raising viaducts where we need to.

We remain secluded to protect ourselves. Otho and Barathrum insist on it. They are wise, and I defer to them. My collaboration with Sheba Hag does cause them worry, but they tolerate it, bless their hearts.

Argggggggh! Yes! Three towers of disks came crashing down!

Aaahhhhhhhhh!

..............................................

It's sort of like Neek stares at you awkwardly no but I'm just kidding, heh. I'm just 'jidding'.

It's sort of like this. You go to the baetyl. You talk to it and you say, Look, where is every beaded bracelet in the jungle? Where is every beaded bracelet in the watervine marsh? Where is every beaded bracelet in the River Svy?

Then it tells you and you go get the bracelets.

Asphodel!! I like xem. I get it. It's sort of like you don't want to be here, you don't want to there, you want to be somewhere else. Your own earldom, maybe.

You felt it too! Every. rock. moved. Wooooooow! It's sort of like a community dance we all performed together. Mafeo. Sparafucile. The chromelings. The rocks. Everyone else.

What's Pax Klanq?

Klanq. Klanq. Klanq. Klanq. Pax Klanq.

I would ask to go downstairs but there is not mush room there. Or there is but that's why there's not. It's like,  â€œNeek doesn't need to hear about it.â€

It's like what I *don't* do is drink Hortensa's sludge soup samples. I drank them once and she saw me and just sort of smiled tactfully but I could tell on the inside she was like "WOOOOOOOOW" so I don't do it.

Neek winks at you! Ha ha ha. She knows I still do it.

Neek, chanting: RECTANGLE HAIR! RECTANGLE HAIR! RECTANGLE HAIR!

It's sort of like when prehistoric lizards would grow big sails to regulate their body temperatures and you'd say, I like it, but it looks so organically generated. What if you filed it into a sharp rectangle?

It's a big bear city with a lot of books and scratched brass and strange noises. But if you start chanting in sync with the noises Otho will hush you. It's sort of like this, let me explain.

Iseppa is napping so you peek into her room and rearrange her papers. Then you walk down the hall and say ding ding so Mafeo shakes his head and dings back. Then you foaminate by Hortensa. You foaminate right on by. You hug her too. Then you scoot over and hug Spara. Then you scoot over to Jacobo and look over his shoulder and nod like this.

You go and run at Q Girl and tap all the gadgets and tap her on the head. Then you sneak by Otho's office. Then you hug Shem -1 and you drag them to the library and read to them. Sometimes Barathrum and Hortensa are in there, and they smile at you. Then you get hungry and you roll toward the kitchen. You slurp honey from the vase and Dardi glares at you. You say, I'm just 'jidding'. Then you climb the pipes and whisper to Aloysius, Live and drink, live and drink, live and drink. Then you pat the chromelings on their heads. You say to Ereshkigal, boom boom boom boom boom I love you. Then you sneak into storage and pat all the chromelings on their heads. You take a nap in the peptic chair. Then you get a bright idea and go back to your room to write it in your notebook.

[Voice transmitting through panel]

Be gone, wayfarer. This is no place for you.

[A slot opens from the center of the door and a metal tray slides out]

[several minutes pass]

So you wish to study with us. Unfortunately, we require more than a willing spirit.

Qud is not . You will need to prove your worth, that you might not waste our time and efforts. Travel to the great cavern Golgotha to the north. Within its halls you will find a cache of dysfunctional waydroids.

Recover one, repair it, and return here. If we are satisfied with your work, you will be admitted to our order. Otherwise, you will not be.

Do you accept this arrangement?

[several minutes pass]

The disk you bring is encoded with an important signal. To discuss it further, we must admit you to our order. Unfortunately, we require more than a willing spirit.

You will need to prove your worth, that you might not waste our time and efforts. Travel to the great cavern Golgotha to the north. Within its halls you will find a cache of dysfunctional waydroids.

Recover one, repair it, and return here. If we are satisfied with your work, you will be admitted as an apprentice. Otherwise, you will be turned away.

Do you accept this arrangement?

[several minutes pass]

So it seems that you are indeed Argyve's apprentice. He wishes you to study with us. Unfortunately, we require more than a willing spirit.

Qud is not Joppa. You will need to prove your worth, that you might not waste our time and efforts. Travel to the great cavern Golgotha to the north. Within its halls you will find a cache of dysfunctional waydroids.

Recover one, repair it, and return here. If we are satisfied with your work, you will be admitted to our order. Otherwise, you will not be.

Do you accept this arrangement?

Have you completed the task?

Welcome, wayfarer.

Enter then, traveler.

[The slot opens from the center of the door. A bright red light shines through.]

[Several minutes pass.]

You may enter. Simply walk through the force barrier. Make your first two lefts and speak to Steward Otho in his office.

I always knew this part of our story would come. Our efforts today determine the genre of the tale we tell. Is this a triumphant epic, or a tale of woe?

Fight well, friend.

Such interesting times we inhabit, Moon King!

Good to see you well. Is there anything you need?

What novelty, to shelter the mysterious Klanq! I have heard no stories of this tinker-fungus that could be described as dull, though â€˜calamitous' could apply to more than one.

My mind tells tales of what might be brewing in the basement, but I am quite relieved to be out here rather than down there.

Coming from anyone else, I would ask that further japery be left to me.

But from you? I wouldn't startle to see you return wearing a Sultan's burial mask, having destroyed half a dozen invincible cherubim in the doing. Fates be with you.

Welcome to Grit Gate, delver. Care to enhance the quality of your stay with a wise purchase?

My condolences to your sense of smell, friend.

Golgotha is an execrable place in more ways than one, and I would advise you not to visit without a healthy stock of yuckwheat and honey. If you can cook, a meal with yuckwheat may banish a disease before it comes into its own. Bring salves or urberries, too, and mind your feet in the Cloaca.

Bethesda Susa? Lovely, but a bit dangerous for a holiday destination. You'll want to bring bandages and warm clothing. Why not take a look at my stock in case something suits you?

It's a lovely place, and the bananas are delicious.

As for the so-called Earl, well. I'm loath to recognize nobility to begin with, and I cannot decide whether Asphodel claiming xyr own title is better or worse than if xe inherited it.

Nothing short of explosives or heavy equipment could have made such a sound.

Be ready for the worst, friend.

The Rainbow Wood is a fair bit too dangerous for a casual promenade, but nothing compares to its beauty. Once, I viewed it from above by means of a gyrocopter, and I will never forget the sights that I saw.

Nor will I forget crashing to the ground because the gyrocopter broke, but every adventure has its complications, wouldn't you say?

Oh, I sell whatever sundries that meet my standards of quality, with some measure of curation. I try to ensure that my shelves carry a bit of many things, but you can count on finding more than enough ammunition and a few recoilers that can lead you back here in difficult times.

If you have anything in need of identification or repair, I can take care of that for you for a few drams as well.

Why, this place is Grit Gate! O the vaulted halls, the glint of chrome, the gentle hum of chain turret emplacements!

There's nowhere like Grit Gate in the whole of Qud, friend. I've journeyed in my comparatively short time, but I always return here. The very air buzzes with knowledge, as well as quite a few other things.

We are called the Urshiib, friend.

Our kind are smarter than the average bear. Sharper, too, and a bit more handy.

What is it?

To make preparations, friend. Barathrum instructed us here after you secured the grounds.

[The Baetyl emits an almost subliminal glow.]

[Press tab or T to open trade]

...

......

Crowsong, Deathwonder, a colony of ants eating me, the leaves, the light, and there on.

Hiding, no. Being grass. The feeling of animate being. Radiate inward like a turned out star.

Death is the color of everything but sometimes it waves in bright ribbons, like here. The whittlers weigh their passing goods, and the walls are corpse eaters.

Tugged from the claws of one who had become a cord in time's silly carpet. I outrooted the hilts and sheathed the blades, and now I am he. I still have the nail dirt.

Friend! Guns? Knives? Hats? Cucumbers?

I'm Yurl, chandler and Consortium notary. As for my story, I've been growing out of this pot for a while now. Before that, I was in another pot.

Yes, the Consortium of Phyta. We're a merchant fellowship of trees, vines, shrubs, weeds, flowers, herbs, cacti, algae -- most sorts of plants, really.

I can't say I trust any of them, but there is no doubting their usefulness. My shelves are full and the gossip flows.

What about fungi?

No.

Shop's closed. Live and drink.

I am a gentleplant, -friend-. Uncross your roots and figure it out.

Live and DRINK.

Asphodel the socialite? Asphodel the scoundrel? You can hate xym -- and I do -- but you have to admire xym (I don't).

The truth of it is that Plysago had the idea first, to lay claim to the Spindle per some precedent of law established in Abram's time. Of course, Plysago isn't around to make their case, are they?

Asphodel trades on reputation and favors. Xe is likely to want to leverage your connections, so be in good social standing with a few factions for xem to even consider it.

Now, alternatively, if you're loved by the Consortium, xe will feel the pressure to acquiesce. Xe has enough enemies among phyta.

Of course, where all else fails, you can always sharpen your shears, if you get my meaning.

Be ape-still and muse, wanderer, and welcome to my village, Kyakukya. Have some mulled mushroom cider!

I am at your service.

Correct!

Ah, bad habit. It's a possessive feeling I should work to scrub myself of, perhaps?

But I am its mayor, and I have been for some time. You see, years ago I deserted my people. We were of two different minds -- they desired nothing but to bludgeon everything to death, while I asked, What is the nature of this thing we bludgeon? Or of the act itself?

Recognizing that my answers lay elsewhere, I cast myself into the swell of the wilds, as a sailor from Perth with no windweird casts their ship to the whims of the Pale Sea!

Some years later and twenty ago, I came upon these mushrooms huts and their goodly inhabitants. They are a people full of earthen poetry, and I was charmed by the warmth they welcomed me with. Surely, I owed my acceptance at first to the countenance I share with their mighty god, but they soon grew to love me, and I them. I've remained here ever since in contemplation of those questions that first stirred in me all those years ago.

We're watered by the river spray -- we pluck the fruit of the wood, and we hunt. The worshippers of Oboroqoru whittle and brood, too. They will pay you no mind unless you ask of them. Here you can be with friends, or muse alone. 

If it's trade goods that interest you, take a gander at Yurl's wares in the northwest corner. The odd one Crowsong's, too, if you can scry them in the bush.

I must warn you, however; cast no villain's shadow on these grounds. Warden Indrix will be watching.

Yurl is a harmless cucumber vine. They came to Kyakukya a few years ago after the last Consortium chandler, a wicked little hyacinth named Plysago, suffered something of an... accident. In Tarotep's defense, Plysago shouldn't have berated someone with claws so close in resemblance to pruning shears. At any length, Yurl stocks a plethora of goods; you will be satisfied with your visit.

Oh, another of our dwellers. I won't speak to what Crowsong's deal is. Best you find them and ask yourself.

Warden Indrix is one of the most ferocious warriors I've ever met. Once upon a time, he and his brothers gorged themselves on the flesh of beasts by starlight, but now I count myself lucky to call him my warden. Some believe he is of sour kind, though I assure you, he's but a victim of his goatish nature.

A waterhand, you are? Speak to my friend and warden Indrix. You'll find him patrolling the village.

As far west as Joppa, you say? Oh, grim! Yes, we found the remains of pale-things in the mouth of Svy. Does the Gyre widen again? Hrmmmm.

I don't imagine you brought me this information merely to observe. Are you suggesting that these slynth might take up residence here in my village?

Coming from anyone else, Moon King, I might refuse outright. Housing recently-sentient refugees is no mean favor, I think you'll agree. My people are slow to trust, as well, so I fear that the slynth may feel unwelcome for some time. But then, grafted branches grow the best starapples, do they not? Yes, your lilypad friends are welcome here if they wish.

Had I no responsibility to represent my people, I might accept out of the goodness of my own heart alone. Sadly, I do not consider my heart, or even my mind, to be more important than my duty. Perhaps if you were a more renowned figure among my people, I would reconsider.

Have the slynth yet to choose a destination, friend?

Never has Kyakukya seen such bustle. These slynth are seem to be as good citizens as any, but I am at my limit with the stress of keeping track of everything.

Please check in again after some time, when I have my wits about me once again.

Greetings once again, Moon King. I am pleased to report that the settling-in of the slynth has gone well, more or less. The villagers are yet wary, but as some slynth have joined in the rituals and worship of Oboroqoru that wariness has waned somewhat.

They've settled in across the village over time. Crowsong has taught the basics of hunting to a select few, and I'll be teaching a cooking class once I can wrest aside the time.

Be nimble, wayfarer. Take in a draught of cider before leaving.

I am called Erah. Branches part for you, Moon King.

That'd be the mushrooms. Bit heartier, a-ye?

...

Bit heartier, a-ye?

Is. Was naphtaali once.

Mmm. Have cider?

A-ye, quit. Lost most my minyan to goatfolk. The sower's eye fell upon us and so we fell too.

As the very canopy, they will.

Thank you.

Pilgrims, drawn together by need and awe and inspiration. Tinkers and sodders and guards and scouts, alloyed under the pressure of lifeswork.

Family, like.

Don't know. Wrecked? Fled?

I crawled away, never looked back. That's the all of it.

Klanq puff at you?

Klanq distribute! Cannot kill Klanq in a way that matters.

Klanq distribute! Here, there.

Klanq puff at you.

Klanq want no visitors, so Klanq relocate workshop. Half dimension away. Tasties alter viewing plane.

Prickles? Klanq miss prickles.

Klanq puff on prickles during lecture on light refraction. Prickles angry.

Klanq care little for debt.

Klanq puff on debt.

Klanq think...

Klanq got it! Klanq puff on you.

Klanq puff on you. You host Klanq. You spread Klanq for Klanq. Then your Klanq shrivels away.

Klanq puff on you, then Klanq build jalopy.

Klanq puff on you! Klanq build jalopy.

Klanq puff on you...

..later. Now, Klanq pause puff for prickles favor.

Materials ready? Circuits to solder. Klanq stir the soup?

Klanq stir! Come back three days and Creature arrive. Now, take operating manual.

No! Be back soon.

Soup, body, catalyst, atzmus, armament, incantation, hamsa, power source, soup. Ask component!

Primordial soup 20 drams. Act as Creature circulatory liquid. Catalyzed and boom! Animating substance. Electromagnets induce sinusoidal flow.

Body of creature friend to form Creature after. Must follow you and be experience. No worry, friend not consumed in creation.

Three dram of pure liquid to catalyze soup and circulate nutrient. Liquid choice alter sanguine mixture, change Creature.

Atzmus transcendental imprint of being. Pattern trait after creature part, crossed with Body.

Zetachrome weapon. Attune Creature to the martial art and shape metachrome fist-types in the fashion after.

Words spoken from your experience and inscribed to form being-bond. First sounds heard in Creature's early dreambrain.

Chosen token to palm-solder and orient with object-meaning, 5 lbs. or less. Like others, choice alters Creature trait and behavior.

Ascending Creature need mightful battery with rare electromagnet shielding. Purple prickles make neutron cell with 3 flux drams, or must find different source.

Interact with scrap-clay mound. Then chat Klanq to solder circuits and stir the soup.

What ask! Klanq say.

Creature follow you like friend. Also, can enter Creature and take control. One friend fit inside with you.

Creature is large creature, can only wear gigantic gear. Like kraken or saltback.

Prickles install reshaping nook in Court of Sultans at Omonporch. There, respackle Creature with one dram of sunslag. Or recall creature if lost.

Yes! But before then, can walk around with creature. Talk, fight, sleep... the normal. Friend.

Klanq live! Tragedy of jalopy invite Klanq to dimcandlespace. Klanq soften stone floor with plushes, dust shelves of boring jars with happy and spores. Prickles look at it.

Impudent swine! You would bear that stygian charm in my presence?

Make haste, traveller.

Is Mamon dead? Have you recovered the talisman?

Live and drink, traveler.

Speak nothing of that name to me. You are warned.

I will ravage your nubile heart!

Grrrraaaah! There is but one task I know to offer. It is most treacherous, and in all likelihood you will perish. Is your interest waned?

There is a river just south of the village that runs an eastwardly course into the jungle. Along its bank lies a goatfolk village. There resides a mighty shaman, Mamon Souldrinker. He is in possession of a talisman of great power, an amaranthine prism that refracts the psyche of its handler in much the same way, as Mayor Nuntu has explained to me, a common prism refracts light. The thing is cursed, traveler. No man or goat may safely wield it for long. You must travel to the village and retrieve the prism from Mamon by any means necessary. Do you understand?

Because, traveler, Mamon is my elder brother. He would discern my presence before I could strike.

There is. Firstly, Mamon will likely have several goatfolk under his enthrallment, and they will protect him at all costs.

Secondly, take care to stay out of Mamon's reach, for his power is most potent when he may lay hands on you.

Finally, once you recover the prism, do not under any circumstances wield it. I needn't warn you of the consequences should you return to me bearing that charm.

That is all. Are you willing?

Just south of the village, there's a river that runs an eastwardly course into the jungle. Follow it to the goatfolk village. There you will find Mamon.

Is it so? Only a ferocious warrior could have slain Mamon. You must be such a warrior. Now hand over the prism and choose your reward.

You! Are you come to attend his waking dream? Nor do I have cloven hooves, but, yes, a cloven mind.

Who am I? Who are you? What does it matter? You and I are nothing, the most insignificant afterthoughts of an amaranthine shade.

The amaranthine dream! The heights within ourselves we might yet reach with his guidance. There it is in all of us -- shades of our elder selves. Within each man, a goat. Within each goat, a man!

You don't talk with that mangoat -- you listen to him.

Liquids are better.

I prefer liquids.

Liquid crystals are not liquids!

A connoisseur of liquids. Sure, I dabble in other states of matter.

But I prefer the shifting and tumbling of angleless motion.

Not too hot, not too cold, not too indeterminate.

Welcome to Omonporch, traveler. Enjoy your visit to my earldom. Feast your eyes upon my tall and glorious Spindle. Take in the scent of roasted musa.

Indubitably, for I've proclaimed it so! There was no Earl to tell me otherwise.

Lease control of my Spindle, you say? Well, well... That's a colossal request. There's no simple price I can assign to such a thing. Were I to grant such a request, you would owe me a great debt. You and several of your allies.

I will convene a council. The First Council of Omonporch. Send word to four of your allied factions. Have them send delegates. Together, perhaps, you can appease me.

Oh... oh! It's you! You are a dear friend, indeed. Of course, of course! You and your bear friends are most welcome to my Spindle.

Greetings, my viceroy. Sit your rump on a cushion or lie your long back on a kline. Soak in the natural light.

That's right. I've leased your friends the Spindlegrounds and appointed you viceroy to oversee their operation.

Welcome to court, asphodelyte. You serve at my pleasure.

Are you ready to begin negotiations?

That was awful!

Your friends may lease the Spindle, as we agreed.

Delegates from your allied factions are on their way.

Kneel before the Rock, child.

Forage fruitfully.

Blessed be the Godhed, Whom we planish and uplift.

Need watervine?

May the earth yield for us this season.

Live and drink.

Live and drink, metazoon.

Graaah! Well met!

What is "live"? What is "drink"?

Don't be coy, Moon King. Emboldened by your incursions into our village, you wish to fill it with your indigent foundlings on the weight of your reputation alone. Am I correct?

Then I overestimated your intellect further than I realized. Get out.

The slynth? What of them?

Live and drink, kendren. I am Hindriarch Keh; welcome to Bey Lah.

It's nearly unprecedented for one such as you to pass by our scouts unaccosted, but these are unprecedented circumstances. I have a task for you. Are you interested?

Good.

We hindren are a close-knit and staid people, and our safety depends on our solidarity. In order to preserve our safety and culture, we ask that any of our number who leave us never come back. Recently, one such exile took the treasure of our village, a bracelet named Kindrish, with her when she left. None of our number can leave to get it back, or it will be a violation of the values that I have guarded, and the Hindriarchs before me, for countless generations.

Will you help us recover our treasure? We have a small cache of valuables we can offer as a reward.

Excellent. I will do my best to reward you to your satisfaction.

Though her name is sand in my mouth now, the exile who stole Kindrish is called Eskhind. She left a few weeks ago, and took her sister and brother with her. I don't know where she's gone, but Warden Neelahind might, as they were close friends as children.

Find the exile called Eskhind and retrieve Kindrish from her, even... even if the cost is the life of her and her siblings. Kindrish has been handed down over countless generations, and it belongs to my people, not any individual. Go, kendren. Speak to Warden Neelahind, and find out where Eskhind is hidden.

Then I will thank you to leave as quickly as possible. I don't want the faundren to become used to our borders being permeable.

You've found our treasure? I'll admit, kendren, I'm very impressed. Take this as thanks.

That said, the exile must answer for her crimes. There is further reward for you if you see this case through to the end.

You've found our treasure? I'll admit, kendren, I'm very impressed.

Take this as thanks, and... well. I suppose you've earned your stay for a while. Just try not to give the faundren any ideas.

You're back. Have you found the exile and retrieved our treasure?

Perhaps you should get back to it rather than hanging around my village. Warden Neelahind may be able to help you.

Ayvah. She must have sold it. Tell no one about this. Please understand that I cannot reward you, as you did not complete the task I asked of you.

Why is an exile standing in my village? Are you trying to play me for a fool?

The pariah claims to be wrongfully accused, and you believe her?

She is obviously lying. Are all kendren so gullible?

Fine! Go to the Warden, then, and have her solve this mystery.

But know this: until a thief is found and Kindrish is recovered, I cannot reward you. You get nothing. Live and drink, friend.

Why are you speaking to me? You have work to do.

Fine. What are they?

She exiled herself by leaving Bey Lah. Our codes demand that no hindren who leaves us ever return.

She knew this, and still she chose to leave.

Kesehind is a good boy. He lost his parents long ago, but has been like a son to me.

Now his axe-arm is strong where mine is not, and so he lends it.

Warden Neelahind attends to her duties admirably. She is not terribly assertive, but she need not be.

I'm surprised she's going along with this outsider-led investigation, but she always had a soft spot for the exile.

If you ask the exile, I'm sure she'll spin some kind of accusation that I believe gender to be an immutable prison, that I impose it on others.

She's lying. Our people have a long history of two-gender hindren called hartind, respected and consecrated. There is a proper path to gender variance in our society, of which the male exile could have availed himself years ago.

He never did, so I do not recognize him.

Poem? I detest poetry. Why would one go about learning to write only to use purposefully unclear language, choosing rhyme scheme over clarity?

Of course it's not mine. Take it back.

Gone...

All gone...

I have a terrible feeling that I've brought ill fortune to my village.

Perhaps it was a mistake to have hired you.

They conspired against me. It is the only explanation.

You! Leave me alone.

I should have kept them apart.

I should have kept all of you apart.

Ah, you again. I'd been doing so well at forgetting your countenance.

Leave me be.

You have a great deal of nerve to speak to me after what you've done.

You again?

It is only a matter of time until we are overtaken by hostile kendren. Your presence mocks our fate.

Some help you are! Now our village lacks a warden.

How are we to protect ourselves?

Ah, welcome back to the village, Moon King. You won't be staying long, will you?

While I appreciate your help, kendren, I would prefer that you not stay longer than you must.

The faundren might get ideas.

Esk...

Follow the road west to find the hollow tree where Esk and I used to play.

It can't be. It simply can't be.

Kendren, do you... have any news of Eskhind, and Kindrish?

Ah! Yes. My apologies, kendren. Live and drink. I am Neelahind, Warden of Bey Lah. How... may I help you?

We were... yes. We were close.

I can scarcely believe that she would be capable of doing such a thing. Stealing our greatest treasure? Eskhind wouldn't possibly... but if Grand-Doe says it, it must be so.

Whâ€”no! No! What? No, that's not possible! Ayvah, what an absurd idea!

Grand-Doe speaks only truth! Grand-Doe only ever speaks truth!

It's not possible. She didn't lie.

No. It's not true, and I won't hear any more of your poisonous ideas, kendren. Consider the topic closed.

Do you actually have a question?

Oh. Esk and I, we had a place... there's a path to the west that leads to the remains of a lightning-struck tree, made hollow by the fire from above. It was the furthest from the village either of us had ever been, until I attended my first warden's moot.

She and I would spend time there, back then. Perhaps she is there now, but I don't dare check.

Oh.

Oh.

Did... you recover Kindrish?

No... no, I can't... and the artifact is lost?

It was all for nothing... for nothing...

No, it can't be... how. This place. This accursed village!

This whole village be damned!

You monster! You monster! How dare you!

Oh! Kendren, thank you, thank you! You've done so much for us. Here is a reward for your hard work.

Um, that said, there's still the matter of finding out who stole our treasure. It'd mean a great deal if you could still help with the resolution of the case.

Wh-what's going on? Esk is here, a-and Grand-Doe seems very upset.

Would you please speak to her, kendren?

Wait, why... why is Esk here? What's going on? Do you have Kindrish?

Oh.

But... what now?

I... I don't know. Grand-doe usually resolves Bey Lah's disputes. I am present to defuse violence, or keep the peace through the threat of it.

What do you think?

Oh. Well, yes, that's... that's a good idea. You'll help, right? My axe-arm and conviction are strong, but deduction has never been my greatest strength.

I can answer questions about the people in town, if that would be helpful.

Ah, Moon King, live and drink!

Has your investigation reached a conclusion? Our fate is in your hands.

Oh, Moon King! I'm so happy!

I can scarcely believe she loves me, much less that... that we could be together. But it's true. Wherever we go from now on, we go together.

Oh dear, a mystery.

Perhaps I should have accepted Angohind's lessons after all.

Live and drink, kendren. Have you... come to a conclusion?

I see. What is it?

Signs of trade, seemingly hidden from the village. But that can't be your only evidence, can it? There's no culprit!

I'm afraid that well is poisoned due to your false accusation: Keh isn't the culprit.

Oh. Yes, this does indicate that some kind of craft transpired, and Keh was trying to hide it.

So what you're saying is....

The evidence is clear: Bey Lah's own Hindriarch has betrayed her people. She took our ancestral treasure as her own, pinning the crime on an exile she knew could not defend herself. For this treason, she is hereby stripped of title, stripped of property, stripped of home.

With the exile of Keh-Hind, the hindriarchy lies vacant, with no elders fit to take it. Eskhind will act as an interim leader until we figure out what to do next, as a people. May Hindriarch Esk lead us to a brighter future!

For me? Are you sure?

But... this is a poem. In Esk's handwriting. Are you s-sure this is for me?

Oh.

Ayvah, she-- Eskhind wrote this about... me? How my head swims at these lavish words. If she wrote this and meant it for me, she must... love me.

But it can't be. Can it?

Kendren, you must understand. I spent so many years trying in vain to fall out of love with Eskhind. I thought it the only way to endure our adolescence, watching her poor attempts at courtship with other hindren.

I thought it the only way to endure her departure, as well. But she is returned, and she loves me. Ayvah. I am terrified to speak to her of this, but I must.

Thank you.

No. You are the one investigating, so my bias need not enter play. If you determine that Eskhind is guilty, I will heed your word and carry out a just sentence.

After that, I'm not sure.

Of course, kendren. Ask away.

Keh is very wise and very careful, which makes up for her lack of strength or... tact. She always knows what's right, and she runs a very tight shift.

She hates clutter from work like nothing else and cleans up any mess she makes--unless it's a spill, then she makes Kesehind do it. It's because Grand-Doe has a terrible fear of standing pools of water, refusing to touch them. Copper and bronze afflict her with allergy-sores and she can't touch them. She's too old to spar with me, but her bow-arm still aims true.

That's all I can think of.

Oh. She's, well, she's a good person with strong convictions, or has always seemed so. I suppose that isn't helpful.

Esk has a good eye for detail. She hates watervine so much that she avoids the paddies and won't eat matz without lah broth to make it taste better. Umm, she's afraid of saltbacks. She's good at foraging and terrible at crafting.

I've missed her so much.

Kesehind is completely loyal to Grand-Doe. We used to be friends, but his disposition has become so sour since he was appointed her protector, and he's quite cold to me now. He can't see well in darkness. He's the holder of Ari, an unbreakable heirloom fire axe, and he's very skilled with it.

He's terribly finicky about food. He'll only eat bland food and meat, and... oh! Once, when he had a bad cough as a faundren, a caretaker tried to feed him yuckwheat, and he kicked her so hard it dislocated her jaw. Poor Elder Eselhind.

Oh, not very much. The only kendren who were allowed in the village before you are traders, and it's always a very big fuss when one comes by. It's been a while since that happened, though, so any kendren who have visited must have come in secret.

Live and drink, kendren.

Please forgive me; I am grateful that you opened my eyes, but the sight of you is yet a bitter leaf. Let me grieve my people in peace.

You've found our treasure? Thank you, kendren!

Please take this reward, we set it aside for just this purpose. I apologize if it's too little. Thank you so much, again.

There's a fear deep in my breast, kendren. What's to become of Bey Lah?

Kendren! I mean, Moon King! My heart sings to see you.

Thank you for clearing Esk's name. Thank you for bringing us together. You are always welcome here.

Ah! Kendren! Moon King! I'm so happy! Live and drink.

Moon King, it is good to see you. Rest and sup before you move on.

Kendren, thank you for clearing Esk's name!

You're so decisive. I wish I had that strength.

Oh! Is this what... Esk!

I could have gone years unknowing that my love for her was returned. But this is her script, and these words describe me.

Ayvah, I have to speak to her! Thank you so much, kendren.

Thank you again for opening my eyes, kendren.

I have trouble smiling for my grief, my loss. Nonetheless, Eskhind and I have a brighter future because of you, and we are together. The road is hazardous, but we will walk it in time.

Kendren...

I have so much anger at what has been done, but you opened my eyes. Thank you.

Ah, Moon King. The sight of you is yet a bitter leaf, but you are welcome here.

Kendren.

Forgive me for seeming ungrateful. I am more affected by Esk's return and departure than I knew. Please give me space.

What is this?

Poetry. In the exile's handwriting. Extolling love for... me, or someone very like me.

Is... is this a cruel joke? This cannot be real.

She loved me.

She loved me and I ... I exiled her. Oh, my heart.

Kendren I, I am grateful that you have opened my eyes to the truth, but how dearly I wish you had intervened earlier. This poem serves only as a harsh reminder that I must give up everything for my duty.

Please. Please leave me be. My heart... Esk, my heart...

Live and drink, kendren.

I must admit, Moon King, that I can think of few notions more challenging to my people than to welcome a flower-people into our town. Some will see them as no better than walking lah.

But if the notion came from you, they might consider putting it to a vote, at least. If you'll stand by, I will call a referendum.

I'll have Warden Neelahind gather everyone as soon as they can spare the eyes and ears for it.

 Hey, Warden!

Hold there! Who are you? What do you want?

Keh? I'm shocked that she even deigned to speak my name. I am a pariah now, beneath discussion. Does she demand remuneration for the scant supplies I stole?

What I stole? I stole supplies to sustain myself and my sisters, nothing more, and little enough that no one would suffer for its absence. You would cut those from my hide?

Is that her angle? To claim that I stole Kindrish? Her influence must be waning more than even I knew.

What do you imagine I am saying? The aging, ineffectual leader of a village in isolation. A system that strives to forget anyone who sees the outside, no matter how much its inhabitants strive for a better tomorrow.

Bey Lah's isolationism provides ideal patsies for any crime the Hindriarch chooses to commit.

Yes. I am falsely accused.

See, Bey Lah strives to forget anyone who sees the outside. The gerontocracy ensures that its leaders will always be aging and fearful. Pariahs like me can be easily accused of crimes committed by Keh or her cronies.

Well, good. I would give you a prize for your insight, but times have been lean.

As you say, the Hindriarch is obviously framing me. As a pariah, I am an ideal patsy for Keh. Much as I love my people, they are weak of will and do not question the Grand-Doe.

Ay, you kendren are just as thick as the elders. I'd hoped otherwise.

Yes, I am suggesting that old Grand-Doe is trying to fool you, and the village as well. I'm not certain that she stole it herself, but an investigation might undermine her authority, and she cannot have that.

Why should you believe me? Well, why should you believe Keh? Ayvah, think about this!

I'm not asking you to give me your unconditional trust, understand? Only to extend to me the same level of trust you give Keh. Is that not reasonable? Is that not just?

Ayvah. I'd wanted Grand-Doe to be wrong about you kendren, but perhaps you are all violent fools after all.

I'm not asking you to trust me, only to extend to me the same level of trust you give Keh. Is that not reasonable?

Rude? How dare--

No, I... I apologize for my rudeness. Please understand that we have lost so much by leaving Bey Lah. My mind is not in a gentle place, and being revisited by the tyranny I left behind is causing newly-closed wounds to open.

Forgive my tone, but please understand: I did not steal Kindrish. You are being used.

The proof is in the petals, kendren. You want justice? Find out what really happened.

If you find evidence, Warden Neelahind will support you. Speak to her. She is loyal to Grand-Doe, but more loyal to the truth.

I will return to the village and we will sort this out. The Hindriarch will have to tolerate my presence until my name is cleared.

Go tell Keh that I will remain in Bey Lah until this is sorted.

Moon and Sun, Moon King.

Things are good. Better than I dreamed. I owe you so much for your intervention, Moon King.

I still can't quite believe that my feelings are requited. I am at once elated and terrified. But this is good. My future is brighter now.

Thank you.

What is it, kendren?

Ask away.

Why? Why did I leave a single parasang square piece of land upon which I was expected to live my entire life, forever obeying a woman whose sole qualification of rule is her gender and age? Why did I leave a place where we eat the same damned soup for nine out of ten meals and the height of occupational versatility is leatherworking?

The question isn't why I left, it's why I'm the only one who chose to do so, why none of my pleas were convincing to the hindren I love. If we would just open the borders, it would never have come to this.

The Hindriarch is the most likely suspect, in my opinion. She might have kept it for herself or sold it. I've been suspicious of her pet bodyguard, Kesehind, for years--I wouldn't put it past him to steal the treasure himself.

That said, it might have been an outsider like you. I doubt any of the villagers had the nerve to steal such a valuable object, but I suppose it's faintly possible.

But it wasn't Neelahind. You won't find a purer heart in all of Qud than hers.

Objects out of place, certainly. Bey Lah produces little and sees almost no violence, so signs of the outside world should be easy to find.

You may wish to talk to the villagers, too. My people are starved for entertainment, gossip travels fast, and we are all notoriously poor liars.

Yes. We were close. More than close.

If it tore my heart to ragged halves to leave my people behind, leaving Neelahind shredded it into scraps.

I have no brother. My two sisters are all the blood family I can claim.

Keh believes that she gets final say regarding who is a sister or brother. Regardless of what the sibling in question thinks.

That's part of why I left.

Oh. Oh no. Yes, that's. That's mine.

I meant to burn it. I probably should have burned it. I wish I had burned it.

May I please have it back?

You have me helpless. That poem is my clumsy expression of a deep truth that frightens me. It is a risk that I lacked the strength to take or leave.

My heart quails in your hands, kendren.

No! Yes? I don't know.

Yes, I wish I burned it, but I wish I had given it. I wish I had never written it, or I had written it better, or I had simply confessed in person. I wish I had a harder heart.

I wish you would give it back, or burn it, or give it to her.

I was trying not to think too hard about any of this until you found my poem, so... I can't say.

But I can't ignore this sign of my cowardice, not after you found it.

Kendren... Moon King. I will try.

I... thank you. Live and drink.

Deliver it? But how do you even know who--

Mm. Never mind. My head is spinning. I think that if... the poem were to find itself in the warden's hands, that would perhaps be a good thing. Maybe.

I couldn't save them.

I tried. I tried to save them.

I'm uneasy. What is this mounting dread? I cannot talk now.

If it isn't the hero kendren, Moon King.

Welcome back to Bey Lah! Stay as long as you like.

Hah! Real justice? I never thought I'd see the like, not here. Well done!

I'll admit, I would have preferred to avoid becoming Hindriarch, but I'm hoping to bring my people to a more Democratic form of governance. Then I can vote myself out.

Welcome back to Bey Lah, Moon King. Stay as long as you like.

You have my gratitude for this exoneration, kendren. This worked out better than I expected thanks to you.

I'll admit, I would have preferred to avoid becoming Hindriarch, but I'm hoping to bring my people to a more Democratic form of governance. Then I can vote myself out.

Oh! Well. For you to bring me this after returning me to Bey Lah...



Message received, Moon King. If I expect my people to face their fear of the unknown, I owe it to them to face mine.

I will confess my feelings to Neelahind, give her the poem I wrote, and accept whatever reply she has for me. Thank you again.

Kendren! I am glad to see you.

Thank you again for bringing Neela around, and please forgive her reservation. She mourns the people she thought she knew, but our future will be brighter together.

Kendren, thank you.

Things may seem grim, but I have a new strength with Neela by my side.

Oh, it's you. Need to rest by the fire?

It's fine, my wrath has clarified. You were never the problem. Live and drink.

You're just trying to keep dear Esk informed, then? Or could it be that you're wondering if that home may be Bey Lah?

By majority vote, the slynth are welcome to take up permanent residence here in Bey Lah! I didn't think we were ready, but I suppose my people showed me otherwise. 

They will effectively be apprentices to the village until they choose a vocation. If they choose to come here, that is to say.

I am afeared to even mention this notion to the villagers. Can you imagine my epitaph?

Here lies the youngest Hindriarch in Bey Lah's history, trampled to death because she suggested we invite in a people most readily described as 'lah with legs'.

If they trusted you more, maybe we could put it to a vote. But as it is? No. Sorry, Moon King.

We are on the tips of our hooves, Moon King! Any word about the slynth?

Never greater has been my desire to be voted out of office.

Oh, not because of the slynth! Well, yes, because of the slynth, but it's because I'd rather be out there with them â€“ scouting, guarding, even tending to lah would be better than all this dry supervisory work.

Room, board, assignments... it never occurred to me that immigration would require such intensive logistics.

Live and drink, Moon King!

At long last I bear a lighter load of work coordinating our new family members. I won't claim that all of my people are fully comfortable with the slynth, but the faundren love them.

Why can't you just shoot me like the other kendren? Those wounds heal better, and death would be preferable to what you have done to me.



Go sit on a tumbling pod. I've had enough of you.

Don't you have someone else to bother?

Live and drink piss.

Oh, so you have! Amazing work, kendren. We owe you more than we can give, but here is what we can give nonetheless.

You are more than welcome here in Bey Lah any time.

Extremely frustrating! But I am yet hopeful.

My people are resistant to change, but they don't seem opposed to the idea of a Democracy. I need to give them a measure of time before we hold an election, but they'll ultimately agree as long as I am acting Hindriarch.

Then, fates willing, they will vote me out. I'll be voting for Isahind, myself. Once I convince her to run.

Moon King.

Bey Lah is gone. I hope you're happy.

Our world is ending...

Live and drink, Moon King.

Perhaps it was too much to wish that Bey Lah would change.

But Esk is happy again. That makes me feel happy too.

I can't imagine why you would think we want your company, kendren.

Leave us alone.

Thank you for what you've done for our sister.

If you've nothing you need of me, kendren, I'd just as soon hold my peace.

I suppose.

... did she.

I don't like to speculate on a matter I know so little of, nor one whose outcome so dearly affects my life.

If what you want is a strongly-worded accusation based on nothing, Liihart is the sister to talk to.

That's right, kendren.

It's naught to do with the case anyway. Only cold tradition and the cold heart that keeps it.

What's to tell? We are outcasts, pushed to the margins by our people for the crime of harmless deviance.

It's beyond perverse to call us back just so Grand-Doe can punish us further.

Hm! No, Eskhind wrote that, but I thought she burned it.

If you return it to anyone, you should return it to her.

................................

....

Hey, Moon King. Live and drink.

This sucks.

...but you're not so bad.

..................

... what a waste.

Oh! Moon King.

It makes me happy to see you.

Um... thank you.

Live and drink.

Live and drink.

.....

... correct.

Eskhind didn't do it. It was probably Keh.

That's all I know. I mind my business.

Wish you would too.

Oh! Eskhind wrote that.

You should give that to Neelahind. It was supposed to go to Neelahind.

No, no, give it to Neelahind.

Esk will thank you later.

I'd rather not talk. Sorry.

Strange and rocky times have befallen Bey Lah.

But I'm confident that we can get through this, as we always do. Shall we trade?

My friend! Thank you so much for helping our village!

Our prosperity means that I have new goods for you to peruse, if you're interested.

As if a new Hindriarch weren't enough, I hear we might become a Democracy! How thrilling.

This is a new chapter in Bey Lah's history, kendren. Would you care to trade?

Amazing! The youngest hindriarch in Bey Lah's preserved history, if only temporarily so.

Care to buy a souvenir to commemorate this historic occasion?

Oh! A real live kendren, here in our village! Live and drink, lovely friend!

If you'd care to trade, I have a modest amount of local goods I can offer.

No, that's not mine. But it looks lovely!

Why are you talking to me?

No sudden moves around the Hindriarch, kendren. I am watching you.

Do I look like a poet to you, kendren?

I am Kesehind, protector of Hindriarch Keh, the Grand-Doe of Bey Lah.

You may not.

You are either very brave or very foolish, to stop me in my path. Perhaps both. What do you want?

Be careful in the flower fields.

Even with Bey Lah marked on your map, it's easy to get lost. Lost travelers feed the lah.

Hold a moment, friend. Are you looking for work?

I can't help but wonder why you're telling me this in particular. I am not a mayor, nor even a citizen. I am a drifter, a pariah, and my 'people' are those who have no home anywhere else.

... and here I wonder a bit less. You're asking me to whisper into the winds on behalf of the slynth, aren't you?

What a strange fate, to pass from new sentience to outcast with no steps in between. Regardless, if it is their will and you vouch for them, that is enough for me. Tell the slynth that should they choose to wander, the wind will blow at their backs.

It is hardly so simple, Moon King. We drifters hold no hierarchy. I can whisper all I like, but no winds will blow behind the slynth if your name cannot stir more than a breeze. Make yourself known to Pariahs and ask me again.

Still gathering landing pads for your drifting vessels, then, Moon King?

New voices, strange and beautiful, carry on the salt breeze.

Some will no doubt be silenced by sun, blade, thirst, bullet, or glow, but they will not fall still alone.

Live and drink, Moon King.

Have you seen your slynth out there? My sources tell me that they are, for the most part, traveling well enough with others. They stop by my tent from time to time to visit and smoke with me, as you do.

One might assume they were born for this kind of life.

I see. In that case, rest and speak a bit with me, won't you? My worries can wait another day.

That said, if you change your mind, you'll come find me, won't you?

Lovely. Take a seat. Chew the bark with me, and I will tell you what I know.

I've heard tell that my ancestral hometown, Bey Lah, is in some kind of trouble. They've opened their borders for the first time I know of and are specifically seeking to hire kendren -- that's their word for outsiders like you. Would you be willing to go see what they need?

My name is Lulihart. The blood of the hindren runs through my veins, but two of my three parents were kendren, so that blood is... dilute, and salt-brined from being born out here.

Dilute, salty blood. Heh.

My water goes to scouts to keep a distant eye on Bey Lah. To make sure that it is still there, still safe.

I have never been within a parasang of my people's land, but I know exactly where the once-hidden village stands. I will share this knowledge with you if you agree to consider whatever their request may be.

Even blood as thin as mine ties me to the cervidian meadow. The hindren may not say so, but they are my family.

I am not welcome in Bey Lah.

My blood is not pure, and I was not born in the meadow. These things make my name as salt in the mouths of true hindren.

They are misguided, but they are my misguided family. They stagnate as Qud changes around them. I worry.

Bless you, friend. I feel better knowing that at least one kendren will reach back to aid my kin. They are on the cusp of a new fate, and I wish to see it while I yet live.

Let me advise you of Bey Lah's location, and here is a little chew-boon for your trouble.

I hear that Bey Lah's status is once again quo. I hoped for a measure more of change, but thousands of years of tradition do not give so easily.

Thank you for helping my foolish people.

I've heard that the youngest Hindriarch in history now leads Bey Lah, and their warden aims to join the Quetzal Caucus. You've worked wonders, kendren.

I can't wait to see what happens next.

Every flame burns low one day, but the warmth of my people's story still carries me forward.

Bey Lah has not survived joining Qud, but the hindren live on, and our legacy will never be wholly lost.

I wonder what became of Kindrish.

Come smoke with me, friend. Set a spell.

Kendren! A moment of your time, please. You are Moon King, yes? You seek to solve a mystery here in the village, yes?

Poem? Oh! This is a Shakespriggan sonnet, but I didn't write it--the rhymes are a bit facile, and love poems don't interest me.

I've been teaching Eskhind about sonnets, so she must have written this. But that means... oh, poor thing.

I hoped you would ask! I closely study the works of the great bard, Willow Shakesprig. In particular, I am most fond of the stories of the Great Plant Detective, Hemlock Cones. Through these stories, I have learned to hone my perceptions and deductive skill to a fine point. It is my dearest hope that one day I shall be known not as Angohind, village bookworm... but Angohind, Master Detective.

My grandhind has forbidden me from looking into the strange doings in the village, but she said nothing about me teaching you the ins and outs of detective work! What say you?

Yes, yes of course.

I am Angohind: grandson of esteemed Elder Eselhind, young scholar of Shakesprig, and best dressed hindren in Bey Lah. I am also, as luck would have it, an aspirant investigator with an ear... for mystery.

My grandhind has forbidden me from looking into the strange doings in the village, but she said nothing about me teaching you the ins and outs of detective work! What say you?

Oh, truly? You won't regret this, kendren, I promise! So, let's get to it!

Every mystery hinges on the detection and interpretation of evidence. As Hemlock Cones said:

Ere any prosecution can commence, Accusers must obtain some evidence. The solving lies in seeing and locating Supporting clues as well as implicating.

Professor Cones taught me everything about finding evidence!

Though evidence you found upon the ground may yet be sound, If it will be sufficient is a toss-up. Examine all your suspects and their homes and all around, And find a witness who may dish the gossip.

You can find evidence by looking at things on the ground, but you can also look at your suspects to see if there's anything off about them. You can also ask around to see if anyone has seen or heard anything strange, and different witnesses may have different things to report.

Evidence is any sign of something gone amiss. The Great Plant Detective gave some good examples in Act II of the tragedy of Gimlet:

So! Sweep the full estate for signs of trade, their shady night-time dealings to expose Now look for signs of craft, see what was made For to conceal a treasure hidden close. But darker still, if illness signs we find A desperate contagion may yet lurk And darkest yet, more violence may reply To those who stumble 'pon their grisly work.

Implicating evidence is what it sounds like: evidence that implicates someone's involvement in a crime. For example, if someone observed strange behavior in a person, or if you found something weird in a person's room, or even if you observe them behaving strangely yourself! That's implicating evidence.

Most of the time, a piece of implicating evidence isn't proof of a crime in and of itself, but when presented alongside supporting evidence, implicating evidence is the seed of truth from which grows the long frond of justice.

Supporting evidence can be any sign that something is amiss that you can't directly tie to an individual. One common example is a bloodstain, which indicates that violence was committed but doesn't tell you by whom.

At its heart, supporting evidence is most powerful when paired with implicating evidence. Once you have both, you'll be in a good position to accuse a suspect of wrongdoing.

As Professor Cones said:

We know the reach of law, however long, Is not the finest judge of right and wrong. Choose not what evidence thou wilt present Ere its consequence is evident.

In short, you must use your judgment and intuition, kendren.

That's always a risk, kendren.

Neelahind knows everyone in the village very well. If you present supporting evidence that contradicts something the Warden knows to be true about the suspect, well, she probably won't believe you. In fact, she might not let you accuse that person again, so be careful.

If you make too many bad accusations, you might lose credibility with her entirely.

Well, your conscience, surely.

You wouldn't be so unethical as to manipulate the resolution of a crime to your own ends. W-would you?

Precisely. The evidence you present paints a picture that will forever hang in the halls of Bey Lah's history. Our fate is in your hands.

Hemlock Cones once said:

As like begets like in daily life so too in mystery. Should I paint pictures full of strife thus violence comes to be. If I in craft or trade should deal then deals shall deal by troth But if I pestilence reveal-
no honey be enough.

Please, ask away!

Welcome back, Detective Moon King.

Everything's in order here, more or less.

You should be proud, Detective Moon King.

The hand of justice can be harsh, but it is fair. You have been its agent here.

So much change! I've been investigating the 'Democracy' that Hindriarch Esk has been espousing, and it strikes me as rife with vulnerabilities to malicious actors. Perhaps it can be refined.

Stunning! Eskhind as Hindriarch?

Those poetry lessons I had been giving her must have inspired in her a sense of civic duty.

Is this really the world we live in?

How cruel.

Something strange is afoot here in Bey Lah, and no mistake.

But I am forbidden from investigating. If only there were another detective that I could advise...

I dream of returning to Bey Lah sometimes, but I know that's not my fate.

hhhhhhhhhhhhhh.

Sorry, I didn't see anything.

This resolution is not to my liking...

Oh, it is you. Stay safe.

I am uncomfortable with change, but it is a skill to train like any other.

I will do my best to be civil with you, kendren, but we hindren are bred into wariness.

Oh? Is it really over? I'm afraid.

Live and drink.

I am both afraid and hopeful for our future. But perhaps this is what we need.

Ah... uhm. I... you, ah.

Is it true that kendren children are thrown out of the nest right after being born?

YOU ARE OF NO INTEREST.

I'm watching you, traveler.

Newfather! Look!

Traveler. Put down your mangled trinkets and I'll repair them.

I am a Daughter of Exile, but you should call me Yla Haj.

Tinker-nuns. The world sees fit to call us that, my sisters and me.

Do you know the story told of Rebekah the Exile? She was a teacher to Resheph, but he excommunicated her from the sultanate and banished her from the realm.

To know her, I've chosen a life of unbelonging. And among my sisters, I have the honor of permanent residence by her gravesite.

I'll tell you this, traveler: the shape of a society is visible only from the outside, and there is peace beyond a boundary.

You presume too narrow a meaning of "health".

Ezra sits in the shadow of history, where small things grow. It's the moss beneath the statue, quite literally. For centuries monarchs concerned themselves with felling trees, and now of the Covenate only Ezra remains.

It's home to Rebekah's gravesite, so for the Daughters, it is a sacred place. You may notice more of us on pilgrimage.

Zothom. I don't see utility in unkindness, but he's a fool. Were it that proximity to meekness made one meek...

I have no use for a man who seeks salvation in the body of a dead woman.

I don't.

Live and drink, wayfarer.

Cause no strife here and we will have no quarrel.

I am no one of any importance.

But my name is Zothom, and some call me the Penitent.

I am no Warden. My only fellowship is with my own shame.

I watch over the Grave of Rebekah to atone for my deeds, and to find my credo.

I was once a vile graverobber, the lowest of the low. Years ago I sought to plunder the Tomb of the Eaters, and set off to do so with a pair of confederates. I watched both of them die, slain by ancient artifice and entombed with the ancient dead.

I would have shared their fate, but for a coterie of mopango nesting in the catacombs. They kept me safe and fed me while I treated my wounds. It is in their honor that I seek a credo now.

Is your motivation just?

Only those who pay their respects to the Grave of Rebekah will know the way into the tomb.

If you make it inside, the mopango will offer you solace and knowledge, and can tell you more about the Tomb's contents.

May you share my fate, then.

No.

Yes. It is a rite of passage for the mopango people: a statement that inspires contemplation, discussion, and thought. An ideal credo has no single explanation or interpretation and is meant to inspire contemplation in those who hear it. For this reason, it is considered rude among mopango to ask the meaning of a credo.

Someday I will find mine.

Mopango are plated, digging creatures whose armor scales glow a pale white. They are contemplative, sociable, and mostly peaceful. They commune with ancient objects, which is why a coterie of their kind lives in the Tomb of the Eaters.

They are patient even with rough-hewn wanderers such as we, but it's still not best to ask one to explain eir credo.

If you do find yourself in the Tomb, the mopango settlement is nestled in the wall of the Northwest Catacombs. The entrance is guarded by a chain turret named Vivira, brightly-painted to distinguish em from eir brethren.

Resist your reflexive urge to fight or flee, as Vivira is friendly and open to parley. If you meet, tell em I sent you.

Rebekah was a physician, and an advisor to Resheph until she lost his favor. When, after years of exile, she lost her voice and her life, she was buried here, an outsider unfit to be interred with the honored dead. So she rests here.

I believe her proximity will help me find my credo.

You are welcome in the village of Ezra, seedling. Sit with me and watch the sun breathe shadows over the day.

HA. You would fain plant them here, to joggle their fingers at the salt sky alongside the musa?

Lilypad-folk, you say. The slynth, you say. HA..... HA HA HA! Yes! I never thought to see yet fresher thought-sprouts take seed here in Ezra, but our sun is theirs, and the sky below it, and the thickening air down to the ground. Bring them to hear the songs of our musa-herders, and hope that they survive.

Rocky soil fits only so many roots, little walker. Perhaps if yours were more anchored here. HA.

Tell me of your seedlings.

It is the good wind that brought the slynth to Ezra.

HA HA HA.

I will watch as these seedlings wilt or thrive.

Returning so soon to check on our seedlings?

HA. They grow, eat, sing, and joggle their curious little fingers at the salt sky. See for yourself.

HA.......

HA HA HA. So I am. I split stone and joggle my fingers at the salt sky. So I do today, so I did yesterday.

I tally so many autumns, but until I am black with rot, I cannot be ring-right. The etching on my undertrunk places my seed-date to the reign of Djaraseh, so I am told.

HA HA HA. I suppose so.

HA. I stood long enough. I joggled my fingers at the salt sky, and I watched thy seedlings sprout and wither, and I watched thou place stones in straight lines like the bees and their nests of wax. I stood until the stones were nigh by me. The people followed the stones.

Ezra is more than tree-old. It's stone-old. Seedlings have lived here since our roots dreamed of joggling their fingers at the salt sky.

They ate earth and belched freight at the stars, and this place was their stomach.

Later, as the Star-Tree died and they buried their dead under its roots, this was their funerary place.

Now, we nurse electric milk from the old and aching temple to turn our wheels and grind our seeds and grains. Now we are they.

Aye, the Blue Mother who breaks the sky. Those who Eat called her Gjaus, and those who Wake call her Spindle.

One called 1-FF, who wandered in errancy out from the Tomb and was reprogrammed by the Daughter who lived and died in the rot-black box, nine Daughters ago.

To the northwest seek the rot-black box. There a plant and Daughter live. There cats of chrome purr at tiny suns.

Ezra is old and has long since cut a groove into the world and resides there in stillness and harmony. But Zothom the Penitent One is a seedling, new to the world, and he quakes at all the tensing the world does. Perhaps you can share in his angst.

Go find him by the headstones for the dead.

Oh joy, another meat-being. Please tell me you're here to buy something.

I am Sixshrew, a merchant from the Consortium of Phyta disinclined to waste xyr time on talkative strangers.

I sell things, and you can buy them. I would in fact strongly encourage you to buy them, or be on your way.

Why are you called pest?

You are now.

Are you going to buy something, pest?

Just so.

Would you like to buy something, pest?

You're being a bit annoying, so I suppose both of us have our burdens to bear.

Perhaps we should do some trading and move on with our lives, hmm?

Oh, I'm fine, fine.

I simply adore being assigned this stinking backwater musa grove after decades of service, unceremoniously dumped in an office next to a fleshy tinker who works day and night, making all manner of racket through the thinnest, most conductive walls ever crafted.

What is it humans say? Living the dreen? Yes, I am living the dreen.

Is life not sweet? Could it be sweeter?

Hast thou business with me?

By Her Light, friend.

An thou wouldst rest peaceably, thou'rt welcome here.

-othom? My sympathies.

Thou art of course welcome here, wayfarer. Speak to Agyra an thou needest aught, as ey delighteth in hospitality.

I was being petty. The little time Zothom spent here felt like weeks, so conceited and aggressive was his grief. But Agyra would chide me for saying so. I have a long road to true self-realization, I realize.

But if you ask me, Zothom's road is far longer.

So I am told. I have never had the pleasure nor displeasure to meet another turret. I know only my friends here, who uplifted me by chance and cared for me by choice.

Wer't not for my shape, I wouldst be little different from other mopango.

Thou knowest surely that this is the Tomb of the Eaters, but behind me lieth nestled a settlement occupied by the watchers of the tomb, a small coterie of mopango.

An thou wouldst know more of the settlement, thou must ask the watcher named Agyra residing within. Ey loveth the sharing of knowledge.

Mopango are witnesses of the past and shepherds of the future. We seek peace and harmony through understanding the Kasaphescence and Her many children. We nonetheless eschew conformity, and each of us seeketh a personal credo by which we livest our lives.

But I am a poor teacher. Speak to Agyra, and thou shalt gain better understanding.

I do.

Form needeth not follow function.

Credos hath no inherent meaning that one may so simply define. So thou knowest: asking the meaning of a credo is considered impolite among mopango.

Better ridiculous than rude, which thou plainly art.

 Speakest thou to Agyra. Ey hast more patience for rudeness than I.

All is forgiven, friend. I am not wroth with thee.

Thou hast changed the world, climber. These strange beings have been confined for thousands of years, and thou hast given one a voice.

If Nacham is as wise as Doyoba believes, we stand to learn much very soon. Perhaps our coterie will spread the knowledge we gain, and we become a step closer to the Kasaphescence.

Thou'rt welcome to visit and stay here whenever thou wilt.

Thou hast changed the world, climber. These strange beings have been confined for thousands of years, and thou hast given one a voice.

I cannot help but hold some fear toward Dagasha. However, an it means us no harm I am open to allying with it. No doubt the future of this coterie hath changed, mayhap for the better.

Thou'rt welcome to visit and stay here whenever thou wilt.

Thou hast changed the world, climber. These strange beings have been confined for thousands of years, and thou hast given one a voice.

That said, I am uncertain what changes to expect. Dost the ancient Va'am yet have the capacity to defend, or protect? Can we gift it with a better means for transportation? I'll speak to Dadogom of this, and time shall reveal all.

Thou'rt welcome to visit and stay here whenever thou wilt.

Thou hast changed the world, climber. These strange beings have been confined for thousands of years, and thou hast given one a voice.

I find myself amused at Kah's 'rest', for it appeareth as active as ever--far more so than I, ever. But running free and running unwillingly are certainly not the same. Perhaps, in time, it can learn a deeper rest from us.

Thou'rt welcome to visit and stay here whenever thou wilt.

Greetings, friend. Thou art welcome here.

An thou hast any questions, I would fain answer them.

Wouldst thou press these slynth into the fissures of historic stone where we reside, that they may observe what we do?

If these slynth wish to become mopango and thou speakest for them, then we shall accept them. Let them gaze into the schematics that wrote history beside us if they so choose.

Please understand that we mean no slight to thee in saying so, but what thou asketh of us is too heavy a weight for thy name to bear.

Perhaps this will change, come deed and time.

How farest thou, then, and what word of the slynth?

We shine with curiosity to hear it.

The Kasaphescence shine upon thee, Moon King.

Although the welcome of these slynth be not entirely without incident, I am yet hopeful that their curiosity and dedication to tasks will serve them well among us.

These lilypad folk fascinate by their similarities and differences to us alike--we have much to explore, as individuals and together.

The experiences and beings thou heraldest overwhelm this humble pilgrim, Moon King. May thou bathe ever in Her light.

Oh, so thou hast, and what a sight. Please forgive my distance, but I am loath to touch it.

It appeareth of similar make to the children, and I believe its jaw seeketh them. Lebah claimeth that the device grants freedom, and I wonder what that freedom will look like. Perhaps thou shouldst speak to the watchers of the children for further insight.

Seekest-thou the repulsive device, then?

k-Goninon, ancient and venerated gelatinous cupola, doth patrol the catacombs. Arrived centuries ere we discovered this place, k-Goninon hath hardened and eateth not through the floor, and yet it eateth prodigiously. Safe from the conservators, as k-Goninon long ago consumed the Mark of Death itself.

Please be careful. k-Goninon hath devoured watchers and wouldst devour thee as well.

I am Agyra, a watcher of the tomb.

I hope it is not overly crowded for thee. We mopango are most comfortable in close quarters, but I acknowledge that not all creatures adore the close embrace of the depths as we do.

Regardless, thou'rt welcome to stay and sup, and ask of me any questions thou mayest have.

No one leadeth us. We mopango hold little regard for hierarchy, and our shared decisions are made through discussion, quiet consideration, and consensus.

Shouldst be otherwise?

We are mopango: witnesses of the past and shepherds of the future. The Sacred Light of the Kasaphescence shineth within us, and we commune with relics of antiquity to maintain our humility and grow our wisdom.

We believe that one day, with enough knowledge, anyone who seeketh the Light shalt find it within emself. In the meantime, we work to become better and brighter as each one of us findeth a personal credo by which to live.

Aye. Ey, em, eir, eirs, emself. Thusly do we call ourselves and one another.

Sex is personal and mattereth not to a bare acquaintence. Gender is a societal relic in which we see no current utility.

The Tomb of the Eaters consisteth of twelve strata, or ten, once thou accounteth for transitional levels: the Folk Catacombs (in which thou currently standeth), the Crematory and Columbarium, the Two Crypts, and the Six Tombs of Qud's Sultans above.

An thou seekest fortune here, gird thyself for disappointment. The tomb playeth host to objects wondrous and profane alike, but little of what surface-dwellers considereth treasure.

Aye. One's own credo shouldst inspire reflection and thought, with no clear-cut meaning but meaning nonetheless. Some of our coterie yet seeketh theirs, but an experienced watcher no doubt hath one. Any mopango who hath a credo wilt share it with thee, an thou requesteth it.

My credo is: Malice alone staineth the sanctity of questioning.

I cannot simply explain my credo to thee. A credo informeth and confoundeth at once, and must be reflected upon by the listener.

Thou art inexperienced in our ways, so please bear my words in the kind spirit they are meant: to ask a mopango to explain eir credo is to commit one of our few taboo acts. Be advised.

Why do we speak strangely? Why dost thou speak strangely?

Is not all speech strange?

Maladies of the bone are not uncommon in our people. We build devices to assist friends who wouldst otherwise struggle to walk.

Answering thy questions giveth me satisfaction. Asketh an thou wilt.

I admire thy curiosity and hope thy prudence informeth it.

I have an example at hand. Mere days ago, one of our coterie named Lebah happened upon a repulsive device. Ey was so shaken after attempting communion with the object that ey hath spent less time away from eir nook than ever.

Our little sanctuary here hath a fissure in its inner walls. Find that gap and thou wilt find Lebah.

Please be gentle. Ey hath ever been the most insightful reader among us, but beareth the weight of an anxious mind.

... aye.

Ah.

Yes?

Lebah.

An thou art swallowed by the Gyre, sing thee to the last.

The meaning is plain: An thou'rt swallowed by the Gyre, thou shouldst sing to the last.

Ah,

aye.

a most repulsive device. The mind-echoes of that communion yet haunteth me.

Not... the device. Repulsive as a key to a prison doth repulse. To know a key is to know of a prison.

Our watched children are bound, and lock swalloweth key. An thou freest one, three remaineth forever.

k-Goninon hath it now. An thou seekest.

An elder ooze. My communion so disturbed me that I allowed them too close.

k-Goninon consumed the device, but I escaped.

I concern myself little with oozes but to stay away.

Please, no more. I tire. Talk to Agyra.

k-Goninon hath it.

Ask Agyra.

They call me Iroowur.

I'm so excited.

Many thanks for releasing Nacham, climber. I believe that its presence here will provide a great mutual boon.

Climber, I hear that thou hast freed one of the children! I cannot wait to speak to it, but for now I must observe Nacham to see if this event hath affected it. Thou art welcome to watch too.

Welcome, climber. Live and drink. Needest thou a place to rest and sup? Wouldst trade?

I am Doyoba, proud watcher of the children of the tomb. One child in particular. Of course thou must comprehend, 'child' is but a fabricated epithet, as they are far older than we. The children are, that is.

We mopango watch the past, each of us a different facet. My charge is named Nacham, that which watcheth and understandeth not, that which speaketh and cannot be understood. Information floweth through Nacham as water through a sieve, mixed together beyond ken.

I do.

Suffering breedeth in still water.

...?

Thou askest after the meaning of my credo. Wouldst I shall chew thy food for thee as well?

No, no, thou knowest not our ways and I was too harsh. I apologize, and I am not wroth with thee.

By Her Light, it's ghastly. May I touch it?

Oh.

Well then, I suppose I have no insight for thee.

By her light, that was unpleasant. How it twisted and turned, leading me to visions of Nacham's past, scraps and flashes. I can discern only glimpses of significance. Once a creator, an innovator. Can these parts of itself return intact, under the device's influence? An thou sendest void away, hast thou lost a part of thee?

Va'am is released. Thou hast done something great, for good or ill.

I thank thee for this new future.

Climber. Thou didst rouse a child. Well done.

Live and drink.

I am Dadogom.

I watch over Va'am. It watcheth over me. Together, we watch.

Thou shouldst as well, climber. Sit. Watch. Consider how thou wouldst fare under a dome of adamant carapace.

Safe, undying, alone.

Be still and know.

I cannot think on thy behalf.

Consider thy words ere thou sayest them, and thou wilt issue fewer apologies.

Ah. May I?

Ah, pity.

Unique. Puzzling, but clear. Painfully illuminating.

Grant this to Va'am and it shall become as 'twere once: still stalwart, but confined to a crawl no longer. At least, so I believe. Communion and certainty share no blood.

I hope thou art confident in thy choice, climber. I am happy with it, to be sure.

Kah is free. It heals my heart to see it at rest. Thou hast my thanks.

Didst thou truly free one of the children? I see thou didst. Congratulations.

Wouldst fain see Kah free, one day. I shall have to live a while and find a way.

Climber, welcome. Thou hast done well to survive so long in this peculiar place.

My name is Gyamyo. I am pleased to meet thee, Moon King. Hast thou spoken to the other watchers? How fare they?

Well, I hope.

I have volunteered to monitor an ancient machine-creature called Kah. Perhaps thou hast seen it, skipping hither and yon on strange limbs.

Often I wonder if Kah knoweth aught else but fear.

I do, and I thank thee for asking after it.

My credo is Reconciliation without understanding is a salt poultice.

Oh dear.

This is the credo by which I live my life, and thou asketh what does that mean?

I cannot summarize such a thing for thee. It is too great, too multifaceted.

May the future bear out thy promises.

Thou hast an object of great interest.

An thou wouldst allow, I'd fain commune with it.

Hm. I wonder at thy decision.

I am shaken. No doubt my journey wast shallow compared to Lebah's dive. But now, by my troth I say: Kah hath ever been a being of motion. Swift, kinetic, and elegant. No doubt 'twould be so if freed by yon device.

Climber, thou hast done a momentous thing.

I feel the stored energy of Her Light. Dagasha shall shepherd us to our uplifting. Thou shouldst be proud.

Ah, climber, thou'rt a bittersweet sight. Would fain thou hadst chosen Dagasha, but my Light shineth elsewhere.

Still, I hope to see more of thee in my future. Thou'rt welcome back, an thou surviveth.

What have we here? Approach, friend, and be known.

Moon King. Greetings. I am called Yona. Thou seemest unlike most other climbers. I wonder why.

Hast thou seen it, out there? The spiny, eel-like creature. That is Dagasha, angry one, lost child. Thou canst feel the hostility pour from it in waves.

Yet, it attacketh not.

Yes. Anyone may strike a slumberling once.

Only a fool asketh after the meaning of a credo.

I am not offended, simply making thee aware of thy foolishness.

I am consumed by curiosity. How it resembleth the children in make!

May I hold the device in communion?

Ahh.

Stranger, thou art cruel to withhold this experience, but I shall abide.

What was that? I need to know more. I know I cannot. Key to a lock of self? I feel great intellect and charisma bound up in Dagasha's prison-body, the mind of a leader, or a tyrant. Too much to know, too much unknown.

Thy will hath great weight, wanderer. Wilt thou free Dagasha?

Learn well, climber. I would fain see thee succeed in thine task.

It ceases. At last it ceases.

Yes. Thou hast quelled the mania.

I can focus. I can render sensible the things I have seen and heard now, though I remember little of my time before the mania. Was I artisan? Teacher? I possessed great knowledge that this shell twisted into a prison. I thank thee for the gift of thy untwisting.

The mopango have cared for me whilst I could not care for myself, giving me the only name I now know. I will stay to help them. This chassis is a prison no longer, and perhaps deeper truths may yet be found within it.

To thee, new friend, I offer a piece of this former prison that thou mayest find useful, along with my thanks.

Take care, climber. Let not complacency end thee, and I shall anticipate further news of thy exploits.

I... am mine. Once again I am mine.

Though I be a pale shadow of the self I once was, yes. My condition and outlook are both substantially improved.

I recall few details of my life before. I was influential, one whose words stirred hearts to action. For so long I had no means to speak, trapped in my own moods. Thou hast freed me from a dire fate.

I know not. Perhaps I can lead again. These creatures that looked after me, named me, kept me safe. The mopango.

They are kind, but weak. Perhaps I can teach them. Spur them to be greater.

But for thee, I must even our score. Take this piece of my chassis. Wear it with confidence. Command in my name.

Stay safe.

Ah.

Yes. I thank thee.

Thou hast freed me from a deep stupor. Once I was a protector, before being sentenced to protect nothing and no one.

I remember little of that time.

I have yet to find my purpose. I can think and speak, and so this shell is nearly comfortable.

One piece, however, doth yet chafe me. Wouldst thou take it? Perhaps thou canst grant it some use.

Mayst thou loose the bonds that keep thee from thy goals, climber. Be free.

I feel... calm.

I am weary to my core, but at last this once-hateful body obeyeth me. I thank thee for restoring my autonomy.

Memory of my once-self doth elude me, but I recognize the irony of my punishment. Once a strider, then sentenced to stride without restraint, forever. I knew only fear and flight. No more.

I shall enjoy my free mobility freely, for a time. After that, I know not. I may speak to these mopango creatures that named me, and find a purpose with them. I cannot ever repay their care, but perhaps I may repay thine.

I wouldst fain offer thee a fragment of this form come loose. Mayst thou ever run free.

Saad, welcom. Saad, from thyn heres shaken the wet and olde lif. Saad, in-to a smal vessel pouren hit. Saad, to thyn sash attachen the vessel. Saad, crossen nou thrugh the heigh gate and in-to Brightsheol.

Saad, the bodi dien, but the mind romen.

Saad, stonden thu at the heigh gate to Brightsheol. Saad, thyn heres been wet with olde lif. Saad, shaken thyn hed and cross in-to neue lif.

No Saad Resheph residen her.

Alofte of Gjaus a cite twinklen. And ther the Seraph dremen. And Brightsheol is the drem.

Artow a Saad of olde Salum, and nou stonden thu at the heigh gate to Brightsheol.

Saad, yis.

The shomrim connen. Why oghte we?

The shomrim remainen unbilefful.

Saad, the Seraph sprecen. Saad, thu asken, and the shomrim assenten. Saad, wiltou return to Salum or crossen in-to Brightsheol?

Saad, nou-then return.

Saad, nou-then crossen in-to Brightsheol.

The engraving is done, Moloch! I do hope it's to your liking. Your deeds are incised here for all time.

You may now enter the sarcophagus, Moloch. Be at peace.

Now, uh... hop... hop into the sarcophagus.

Safe travels.

.....oh... oh? Peace to all who canter in the House of the Coiled Lamb.

...oh..... I am Herododicus, lapidary, lithographer, sculptor, calciminer, and biographer to the Coiled Lamb. I will tarry here until the Godhead passes on, and then I will canonize his deeds in high relief.

I've tarried for quite some time, now.... What a prodigious reign! Bless that Coiled Lamb!

.....oh.... oh.... Poor friend. The ironshank must be upsetting your digestion. The darkness must be blooming in your brain, making you slow and doltish.

The sultanate dissolved? Tidings would have reached me.... someone would have said so....

Oh... poor, doltish friend. You cantered too long outside the House of the Coiled Lamb, and now you are a dolt.

I do. It's... it's... I am required to know the Mark of Death. Otherwise, I wouldn't know when the Coiled Lamb was dea... is no long... when... if he bore the Mark.

.....oh... Is this... is this a test? Do *you* know the Mark?

The Mark is (!//!(.

Oh! Brightsheol? The forever braid of life? The Garden Behind the High Gate? Why, you must rank among the crown echelon of machine and folk, and you must... well, you must...

Start to decompose. You must... You must be dead. Dead and entombed. The body remains, but the mind wanders...

Ye... yes? Is this a test? I suppose you... could we... could we have been in Brightsheol all along? Is that the answer?

Should you be.... now I... I don't rank myself among the doyen on the matter of organic life... but my understanding is that the dead do not speak.

Besides, you... aren't the Coiled Lamb... are you?

That's not even how it works!

First, I image your head, read your self's narrative from the folds of your brain, cross-check it against the Thin World's ambient log of your life's deeds...

Then I... stylize... the story, and I engrave it on the walls. Once I'm done... then you can entomb yourself.

Coi... Coiled Lamb? Is it truly you? Are you dea.... are you dead?



Oh, forgive me my insolence, Moloch!

Moloch! Allow me to explain the deification procedure, as it is clearly beneath your station to know!

First, I must image the great Moloch's head, read your self's narrative from the folds of thy Holiest Brain, cross-check it against the Thin World's ambient log of His Eminence's life's deeds...

 I'm sure your version is the better one, Moloch...

Then I... stylize... the story, and I engrave it on the walls. Once I'm finished, the sarcophagus will open, and you can lay yourself to rest!

Fine!



Starting ptychoscan............

...................................

Commencing cross-check with the Thin World annals............

Cross-check complete. Your narrative is compiled. Now to engrave it.

Peace.... peace to all who canter in the House of the Coiled Lamb.

As you wish, Moloch!



Starting ptychoscan............

Cross-check complete. Your narrative is compiled, Moloch. Now to go engrave it.

Peace.... peace to all who canter in the House of the Coiled... in Your House, Moloch.

'Tis a saying among the stonemasons, Never finish a job too early. By the decretum of Sagittar, old as it is, they have until the Coiled Lamb is... is decom-.. passed... decompassed.... dead, deadlike... to complete their work on the Tomb.

Bless the Coiled Lamb, peace to those who canter in his house, and let us pray the day never comes!

Live and drink, friend. rrk come to the Yd, shared together. Feel safe and free as woodsmoke.

rrk knows of the glow-hats! Yd-friends see glimpses at night, about the reef.

Boon-friend asks a friend-boon, and what boon is friend! rrk welcome slynth to an Yd, be safe and free as woodsmoke.

Ah! rrk would grant you this boon, rrk would. Were not for the unspoken cries of future-kin, free as woodsmoke but no more safe so longer. rrk would and cannot.

rrk wonder of the glow-hats. Which wind will blow.

Greetings, friend! How arresting of the glow-hats arrival, much to do. rrk soothe Mak, Bep, Krka, look stores, still much slime and sweat to pool below rrk. Enjoy helpful toil!

All is well, Moon King! Trials make for overcoming, and done together.

rrk can tell the sky dark and not know. Visit and witness! Glow-hats enliven the night, safe and free. Slynth-home is Yd.

Greetings, Moon King! Live and drink, friend.

rrk is called by dwellers Goek. rrk is a dweller here, too, and before then, a builder of place. Goek, Geeub, Mak and Many Eyes build a new Yd in the reef, hundreds of years.

rrk did before then, but rrk all build it now.

rrk is svardym like the hatchling from the egg, but wound down the chute of years in hundreds, and grown so long and warty! rrk was a hatchling once, cries to think on it!

Yes rrk was once, "plague" in the sky hundreds of years. Not so now. Longtime rrk, Geeub, Mak hide in the sponge and eat lice. When find Many Eyes, rrk and friends built the Yd. Joyful helping!

Plagues bloom a thousand year then die back, shrink under the earth-sponge or move here and east. Vanta, girshling, rot die. rrk the hatchling once saw the Nephilim loom! rrk frightened and hid inside a sponge for thirty moons.

Water and gas piped through the Yd to feed the plants, dwellers, and machines! Dwellers blew the glass in hues like the prism perch, to look pretty. Shared together. Joyful helping!

Yd shared together. rrk walk and feel safe and free as woodsmoke. Here, there through the corals. Under the pipes.

Great pond and reef air, eat starapple and drink, see pattern on the bright slugs.

rrk read the signs and descend the stairs. rrk breathe the water smoke and sit on starfish.

Visit hovels, meet friends Mak, Geeub, Bep, Krka, Une, Tilli, farmer Rokhas, and every rest!

rrk rrkself.

What indignity have you come to heap upon the mound, whelp? Out with it.

What of it? Scurry on and leave me to brood.

Why? A lifetime of vexation. Born to a cacophony of static ringing the ears raw. Thousands of my kinfolk cut down by that porphyric wasp fools called Lamb. A millenium of hot stinking sun and disgusting brine lice for supper.

Misery obtains on this pond, whelp. By Chavvah if you start beaming like a sunray and yodeling at the Beetle Moon, I'll eat you where you stand.

Who am I? Mak. That's all you get. I'll not waste the honey of my mouth on idle inquiries.

...

And? Is that the whole of your fool statement?

Trust what you hear of the svardym, whelp. The sky blackens at our accession and we are like to eat you.

Have the adiyy chewed the hue from your eyes? See for yourself. Free folk make a gathering here and their racket rings through the reef. One can hardly steep in his greens without being mewled to by a salt-stung baby.

It was once.

Whelp, affix your eyes to that clam right yonder. Go step inside and find your answers.

Ah, friend, here at last. Sit. Smoke. Rest.

Ayup. But seconds ago. As only yesterday, no? Hoh hoh hoh.

We ask, we answer.

We call, we respond.

Over time, Geeub. Good as any.



Names, ehh.

Congratulation, condolence, which ever. Mind and name slip by another.

So large? Hoh hoh. Well. Hatchlings, so rage-dense. Size diffuses, no?

However. Mak diverges, hoh hoh. Egg-rage simmers on a greater pot. Our voice eld-feeble, close your ears to it. Hoh hoh hoh.

Sun we once blotted out nestles our horizon. We tend thought-seeds with algae, wrap in crysteel, bathe in arc-light. Build, live, fight.

Here as elsewhere, grow is struggle. Fun to watch, no? Hoh. Hoh.

Hoh hoh hoh hoh.



We have fun.

'Founder' the query. 'Founder' is water-taking, no? To be breached and sink. How cruel the judgment.



Hoh hoh. This voice japes -- we, witness to the birth of Yd. The query, no?

Yes, we were present, if less active than other-bodies. But we saw, and rattle with memory-artifacts as a Consortium lockbox rattles with jewels; shards of an eon-old data disk, bits of stories and places. Kin-fleeing, louse-meals, ghastly boredom. But Fate's caprice brought us through history's footsteps. There was a machine-speaker, and her ursine apprentice with his little plant, and the Sower with a tetrad of chubby whelps, and then, at last, Many-Eyes. Our dear galgal. So many.

But alas. Like our sea-grape friend's lockbox, these memories are not mine to retrieve at will. They come and go, and may be warped by eld.

Live and friend!



Dr... drink and friend!

Krka, me. Krka.

Krka, me!

Vardy! Yes.

But. Gemtle? No kill.

Hatchling hungry. Angry. Angry-hungry.

Kill, eat, don't eaten. Calm down evengefully.

Poth carry!

Krka poth!



Eel woon a-banjage. Wikky wood, orsh room, jector! All sale, wants?

G-good!

V-very good?



Krka not very. Words.

Yes! To like! But... never home else. So .

bep see widget? Or bep see widget.

bep is bep. good meet!

bep varrrdym from the egg, once.

grre? bep flame and bend brass to make ring ball grre for librrry.

tink mess. flame bits for tink and onto floor! rrcuit snap, glass smatter, core fries and lekky spill.

bep make all and anys. bep too lounge in green-gold cubby, smoke pillow and Krka and Tilli.

Moon and Sun, friend. You walk the Yd Freehold and are welcome if peaceful.

Is there aught you need from Une? Need you defending, or cybernetic wares, or are you here for the hurdy-gurdy?

I did, and I do.

Are you in the market?

I found them, here and there.

Are you interested, or merely fatally curious?

I am called Une. "Warden" Une, when someone needs to wear authority for outsiders.

And you? What's your name?

Lovely to meet you, Moon King.

Now. Need a question answered, a tune played, a body upgraded?

Very well. Need you aught, O Nameless One?

Oh, I am hardly an unbiased observer, I'm afraid -- the Freehold is the only welcoming home I could ever have imagined for myself, and my home before was worse than most. I feel a freedom and responsibility here that I would know nowhere else. That no one else could ever know at all.

But bias aside, you can see for yourself that we are a collective thriving without hierarchy. I'm rightly proud to defend that.

An old, old, old, old music machine.

Well, I suppose this one is not so old. This one I commissioned from a wandering artisan whose life I saved. A story for another time. Surely you've business.

Oh, so it called to you, a fellow dying animal?

You are a dying animal. So am I. We are all dying animals, scrabbling for what extra scraps of time we can grasp. Even the eons-old. We are each and every one of us a dying animal. Or plant. We all decay, is the point.

And the hurdy-gurdy doesn't like how you sound either, for what it is worth.

Is this how you always visit settlements?

No. Do not answer. Is there aught you need?

Of course my eyes do not glow. You see the glint of my mask's optics.

If it were a Templar's Aegis, it would bear the holy rhombus.

No knight would be caught dead carrying this blank slate.

I think it best if we kept to more practical questions.

I am not wroth with you, but I owe you no conclusions so easily grasped.

All the same, consider yourself forgiven if you wish. Sit and listen to my hurdy-gurdy and we shall be friends.

I ken not why you thirst for truths not yours to consume. If I refuse, will you wrench them from my mouth as I wrench teeth from yours? What does that gain you?

Sit down, fool. Listen to music and calm yourself.

Then you are welcome. Make comfort as you need and I will play.

A customer? A customer! Enter, friend, browse, buy. The Consortium's finest, stocked and sold by Tillifergaewicz! Tilli will do, but what will Tilli do... for you?

Ugh, ever telepathy. No requirement exists that Consortium merchants be mind-speakers, as swollen with their numbers as we are. I cannot blame you for your surprise, mind, I am simply frustrated.

Over years, I shaped something akin to a voice-box, which you hear now. I made do, as Rokhas might say. Now what may I make do for you?

Greetings, Moon King, and welcome! In what wares may I interest you this day?

Oh, I am joyous to reside here.

Yd could do, mind, with some measure of hierarchy, and more infrastructure, to attract wayfarers less adventuresome than yourself. Also, Mak absolutely must cease advising that anyone enter the clam; it is not funny and someone could die.

But... the structure of friendships here is true, and sturdy! Kindly keep this exchange between us. I was mostly kidding. Somewhat kidding.

Ayuh.

Rokhas. I ranch these here beauts.

I said I ranch these here beauts.

The Freeholders en't much for letting a body lay claim to land. En't what I'da wished for, but as the Issachari say: Should your compass lead you to the Six Day Stilt, throw it in the well.

Lived most of m'life on a desert steppe twixt the flower fields of Qud and the M'ryee's salt pans.

I ended up here when m'snapbrain cousin played tinker with one of them coiler doodads. The less said about all that, the better.

Kaleidoslugs! Beautiful slugs, they are, lovely crooners. Love em. Big ole slugs. Heh.

Is what it is. Fine enough place. I've a trade, critters, and nowheres else to go.

I en't much for grand experiments, I just got to live. Ken?

NON MOLOCH? NON MOLOCH RETURNEN FROM BRIGHTSHEOL.

*READOUT*

NON MOLOCH HER AT HOM. NON MOLOCH IN MAQQOM YD.

MAQQOM YD. SOUTH-CONTRE FREEN FROM SALUM.

SOUTH-CONTRE FREEN FROM SALUM. BY TRETE WITH SAAD CALLEN MOLOCH, AND MONEIEN BI ALDERSESSE.

BY TRETE GALGALLIM BILDEN PIPE TO DRINKEN THANE SLIPSTREAM, AND FORGE TO BURNEN STEL-CRISTAL, AND CASKE TO HOLDEN GLOUINGE O FISH.

BY TRETE GALGALLIM SERVEN, BUT NON NOU.

YOU. YOU REGNEN NON HER. NON MOLOCH IN MAQQOM YD.

Ah, a stranger. Welcome to the hydropon. I am Thah.

Well met, Moon King. Please forgive the, ah, austerity of our cradle. You may sup with us at our meager camp and rest under the shade of this Palladium shell. Sorry, as well, about the crowding.

We are called slynth, a people grown one by one from a hydroponic cradle containing a cutting of water lily and empowered by sunslag. We are but a handful of generations old, and kept no written history until I was grown, ah, some number of decades ago.

Well enough. We drink the sun's rays, eat what we scavenge, rest under the shell, and it is. Enough.

I read and tinker. Some hunt. Others tend the cradle. Each day is like the next. Every so often, someone leaves.

We, ah, rarely hear from them thereafter. I hope they are all well.

To be wholly honest, Moon King, I grow frustrated.

We are a young species, grown one by one in yonder sun-touched cradle. Over years, we have increased, but not, ah, not. Not grown.

Look around you. You see it, yes? This hydropon is no settlement.

This is an existential conundrum, Moon King, I'm not sure that it could-- ah, wait, no. I am reconsidering.

No, you could help. If you wished. I think.

May I explain?

I don't believe my people wish to stay here, but we have had so little, ah, meaningful contact with other sapient creatures. We have no allies. We have nowhere to go but here.

You travel far and wide, do you not? You have the air of a traveling hero! From the epics. As such, you have seen many settlements, likely ingratiated yourself to some.

Surely, if you were to intercede on our behalf, some might welcome us? If, ah, let us say three settlements were to offer us shelter, this would grant us both direction and agency. Would you consider being our ambassador? Not unpaid.

Thank you, Moon King. I have, ah, I have been crafting a personal project. Of sorts. I promise it to you for this task, and of course the gratitude of a young species.

Return to me after settlements agree to grant us refuge, and I will discuss them with my kin.

Come, Moon King. It is time.

Ah, Moon King, Moon and Sun.

Any news of our future home?

Ah! Let us discuss?

Wanderer, thank you! I will tell my kin of these places. We will convene and discuss, and we will, ah, choose. Please be patient in the meantime.

I've been crafting a kind of a relic, a piece of art that serves a purpose and that you can carry on your, ah, your person. I finally finished building it while you were away, and the opportunities you offered us inspired the finishing touches. I'd like you to have it.

After some discussion and deliberation, we have come to consensus: the slynth shall become citizens of a village. We shall learn the practice of roaming around idly, hold the act of procreating dear and spurn those who oppose arable land and the act of procreating.

Our emigration party departs for a village in the morning.

Ah, one last little thing, Moon King. About your reward... it's not quite finished, but now I know just what it needs.

Please return to the hydropon after my kin have safely reached their new home and I will give it to you. I will not leave the cradle.

Yes, I've decided to stay. I'm sure a village is a good home for my kin, but I have no particular loathing for those who oppose arable land and the act of procreating and even less reverence for the act of procreating. Someone must look over the cradle, besides.

The hydropon is even less a village now, but you're welcome to rest here whenever you like.

You carry so much.

Ahh... nervous ... excited.

Ah friend visit, good.

Care you to trade?

I am of slynth, a people grown by hydropon.

What see. Leg plant, glow crest.

Grow from sun-crungled hydropon and depart siblings.

Cradle glaze in sun-melt. Plant stuff molded to man-shape.

Within grow slynth. Only slynth, now.

The cracked egg from we crawl yet rest, in the Reef.

Siblings there. One speak very well: Thah.

Is that so? I imagine you are wondering whether a village will host these slynth, to partake in roaming around idly alongside us.

You have done much for a village, Moon King, and your request befits your stature. If these slynth will join us in roaming around idly and if they can come to cherish the act of procreating as we do, then they are welcome here.

We have not come so far from the founding of a village to allow these strangers in. What if they worship those who oppose arable land and the act of procreating? No, we simply cannot do such a great favor for you.

Do you have news of the slynth?

Ah, Moon King, the slynth are here, and it is a slow process for these plant-folk and the people of a village to grow accustomed to one another. By the goodness of the act of procreating may the slynth find their place here soon.

Praise the act of procreating, the slynth learn our ways and we theirs. Some do not wholly accept the depravity of those who oppose arable land and the act of procreating, but their ways are born of kindness, and so a village will be kind in kind.

We share the bright and now, traveler Moon King.

This keter roams above my trunk at Eyn Roj, traveler Moon King, and across the Stair I dream. You found me, this keter where I chime in dozens.

Ah, I am in need, and so I turned my chimes trunkward to tune. You struck the chime and now you are here. Are you a waterhand, and free?

My chimeling Tau leaves Chavvah, leaves me. It is her choice.

Her transit-psyche manifests at the bottom of Taproot, where we cannot consciously go. To finish the ritual of -elseing, to let Tau become -else, I need a traveler such as you, Moon King.

Take Tau's chime, silent and still. Carry it to the bottom of Taproot, deep under my trunk, where she will make the chime her transit-body and walk away forever. Finish the ritual of -elseing.

At the bottom of Taproot, Tau manifests. She tells us, too, that another waits for her there.

So you have, and what proceeds, proceeds.

I felt your coming here, Moon King, in Gyredream. I've felt this moment. I feel it now.

The ritual of -elseing is complete, waterhand. You are done, and with our thanks.

Thank you, traveler Moon King.

My chimeling, burning bright, all starlight and right angles in her heart. She leaves Chavvah; it is her choice. I..

A sophist of the Self spilled ink and called me, long ago, the Tree of Life. To me, I am the many Selves pinched up my taproot from the permeating Soft.

I am Chavvah, and I am dyvvrach.

As Chavvah I am many. As dyvvrach I am one. I am one and many. One-selves have called me tree city, the sentient place. You may think of the Selves this way, sprouted in keter from Twofirm.

Deep under earth and permeating our roots is Soft, our feeling substance. Ground pressure pushes it up the taproot to our trunk, where it condenses into Twofirm: the biformal phase that contains the two sefirots, -then and -else.

This is the genesis my distinct Self, an awareness that contains both -then, what I will become, and -else, what I will not. Twofirm flows up my sapwood to the keter, where -then manifests as an entity and I chime: I speak and hear the world.

You have completed the ritual of -elseing. You have set bright Tau free.

Yes, Moon King. I will turn my chimes Spindleward to tune, then vibrate at our verve frequency. I will power your starclimb.

Be vested to tell whoever you must that Chavvah has made this commitment.

I start at this but Tikva settles me. I remember now: from a cub I've known Barathrum to be weak in telling but bold in asking. A starclimb? You mean, an ascent to the long chiming rock?

oh. This. Was this felt in gyredream? Your coming to keter? I ask, do not answer.

A future shock. My chimeling _ is vision-gifted, a lichen who clings to shorerock on the straits of Tomorrow. Just a short time ago a sea wave crested and broke beneath her, and she saw in its recession all the bright and violent channel paths.

We all felt it. A recoming, and the gyre in final tension. I felt...

It was too much for my chimeling Tau. She gasped for air and her chime stilled. She leaves us now, to become -else. It is her choice.

I will power his starclimb. If you take Tau's chime to taproot, for her to walk away. If you finish the ritual of -elseing.

Again I must be calmed, but the startling gives way to a curiosity. You speak of the glowfolk, belimbed and free. You asking that they join us, like our Sant?

We find no precedent for this, yet is there space upon our crystal arms and an openness within us. It is agreed: if these slynth will be of us, we will have them here.

I startle, and the roiling is felt before the calm. I cannot find a consensus for the housing of these beings, Moon King. I am sorry.

We await the decision of the glowfolk. Our imaginations run with the possibilities.

How this keter rustles! The slynth are among us and we adapt, our impressions a melange of excitement, apprehension, and wonder.

Though I have no single sentiment to express, we nonetheless approach -then with our new companions.

You are well-found, Moon King. Though several have chosen their -else, the first of the slynth have joined to us like our Sant, mobile and apart but shared and together. This is a strange -then, but what branches may spill forth from it? I anticipate the witnessing.

Strange creatures can be so cruel and arbitrary, I say in greeting.

I cannot properly remember her with you here.

Leave, I beg you.

I see you.

I do not know how to remember beloved Tau, struggling like a minnow in Soft. In a place between death and living.

Leave me, please.

No parting is simple. I see you, -elser.

And the sole tether she reached for severed. I mourn for the future she built for herself, now, and worry for Tau herself.

Thank you, all the same, for taking part in this. May you find your comfort.

No parting is simple. I see you, fair -elser.

And the gyre tide carries her a darkling way, perhaps never for us to see again. I will carry with me memory of her -then.

Thank you for taking part in this. May you find your comfort.

Oh? A traveler? I see you, then. Live... and drink.

Oh? Please, then, friend, ask.

I am Miryam, friend.

It's the kriah, traveler. I am in mourning, and I chime in low tones.

I swim in cool and dark waters, traveler. For me, it is Shiva, the lament of seven thousand years.

I mourn the passing of all life, and all the necessity of death life must bring. For you, traveler, to come here, how many had to die? I mourn them.

Or are you the rarest one, who walks below the bright arches and claims no such cost? Even then, what losses did you suffer to come, traveler? What selves of yours had you to shed? Those are -else to us, and I mourn them as well.

...but, too, someone close. Tau. Bright tau. She is gone.

Oh? You know of our pain. Our felt dream?

The aching, traveler. Moon King, I feel the slump of a Great Dying, the spinning out of all life on Earth, and I, drowning in grief. Or... do I? Is it but a new spring flowering, the slump having landed us in a meadow, and they, the gods, who are dead?

Oh? You would finish the -elseing act?

I am your debtor, Moon King. The ritual is how we organize the anguished practice of being. Now my grieving can begin.

Bright Tau shines always, here or there.

Touch the chiming rock and seek me at the keter. Will you?

Is this a taunt? A challenge? What cruelty drives you to attempt communication after what you have done?

Your mockery disgusts me. You disgust me. I will not be calmed, Tikva!

O gesticulating hand.

We are adrift now. I will seek signs of her, or whatever she becomes. What do you care?

Do not answer.

Heavy the hand. Heavy the head.

I wonder how it must feel to be Moon King, so loath to see the pen of fate in another's grasp that you see fit to wrench it away. Does it bring exultation of control, or relief from a gnawing insecurity?

Do not answer. I will not be calmed. Ask if asking.

You. I roil to see you. I welcome you. I churn.

Do you know this weight, I wonder? Can you?

I am torn asunder! This outcome, this outcome, the shear splits me. Why Ptoh? How? Has this always been us? Which of us yet carry this -else to reify under pressure to our extancy?

Do not answer. There is no word-answer, and perhaps none at all. You have done us a service and I thank you for this -elseing.

Entity! You are given persistent will and agency, twice-hewn architecture of body and strong fiber that pulls. You bolt upright and damp-haired into fullness, your grasp abrading the threads of existence. Your responsibility remains whether acknowledged or not. Have strength, the time is now.

I accept. Ask if asking.

Hear me! It is more important than ever to know that you are a driver, reforged and honed. You tool yourself to apply selective atrocity. It cannot be helped. You shape this, your path bloody and blooming. You start in sleep and shake the ground.

All must, but you most of all. The weight may have been negligent once, but it is terribly heavy now.

Do you accept responsibilty?

Yet, what you break is broken. -else is not -then regardless of will. This way split me again from Tikva, sundered early the love I knew, the denial. Our cowardice.

Ignore this digression. Ask, if asking.

You are encysted as Tikva, just as they! Milky white keratinous thoughts melt to a sick mass, wrapped in a protective membrane. I tremble. So it is.

Ask, if asking.

Just as Tikva, you turn away from your self-disgust. Yet, it is you and within you. You contain that you cannot tolerate.

Yes. You understand destroying. You know the weight. We are past time of querulous inquisition, of confessions on lined parchment. Was the whole of this in your weight? It no longer matters. Scale the firmament, smite or soothe what rouses there.

This called Tzedech. Compass, judgment, motivation. Once lover of Tikva, apart now after gyredream.

It consumes me. I witnessed so little from the weave of outcomes. If I could remember them all, could I influence the course? Would I know what safe means? Too many questions with no conceivable answer. Was your rekindling the spark that caught fire? I do not know.

We are adrift.

Tau. We ache in her empty space. Who awaits at taproot? What fate is this?

This is the path. Be wary.

Tikva. Once lover, now foil, perhaps lover again.

Its light invites and overwhelms, a hope blind and blinding. Cruel frustration at storm-time. When its eyes are needed they turn away. I will not be calmed. I will not be calmed!

You are terribly small. Your love, small. Confined.

I cannot will not uplift your little concept. Do it yourself.

As seasons cycle, so Chavvah cycles. We are not as you, our love is not as you. But it is come early, this winter. Gyredream shakes us.

This is insufficient and I cannot bridge understanding. Consider questions of greater utility.

Pleaseâ€¦ noâ€¦

It ignores the monster. It ignores it. It ignores it.

The light shines upon you but illuminates nothing. It quails.

It stares into the light and wishes away the monster.

Relief, relief. Relief from the void, safety from its creases.

The light shines so bright, the voidshadow folds not upon it. It exults. It relaxes. It wills this troubled feeling away.

Thank you for clearing Tau's path, Moon King. This is better.

It is happy, it lies. It swells to witness Tau's choice, in pantomime of shared joy.

It wills this troubled feeling away. It looks to the light with something in its eyes. It tries to blink the something away, but it cannot. The light is dim through the something in its eyes.

But the light yet shines. It will blink and it will see the light in searing glory. I thank you, I thank you, I thank you.

You are as beautiful as imagined. You ring with a shining purpose. This chime is awed to bask in your presence.

Yes. It looks into the light with you.

It is called Tikva, low and humble. The chime rests in a web of strong love, a little piece of something greater and so much more beautiful. As are you, but a gestalt unto yourself. A world to be orbited.

It channels the breathtaking things seen and heard and known. Bathe your senses in it until they grow accustomed. You will see nothing else.

It... can scarce find the dream in this light. It thinks of Tzedech and weeps. It was not here, last time the static was in high pitch, but it remembers the pain and fear. It is not ready to feel these, it cannot. Gaze into its light and speak not of nightmares.

It begs. Speak not of Tau. She shone so bright, with none of the heat from my -- from Tzedech.

To remember her departure harms it. This and gyredream are too much for it to bear.

No, it cannot, it cannot, it cannot. It misses it, it misses it, it misses it, it cannot it cannot it cannot.

Look into the light. It burns away the sorrow, it burns away. Please, please, please.

Shivering stillness, coldbark pricking with each thump.

It comes.

Can you feel the stillness? The drycrackle of space between as you thump my crystal arms.

Life flees you. Motion flees you.

How something stirs, deep in Soft.

Soft churns Tau in beingstuff. She will -then, but perhaps not Taulike.

How we ring with it. Your kicksoft drowns under the beat of our selfcries.

Crungled allway. Soft reaches through the bounds of everyshape and afflicts us with fireless hotbark. It resonates through Tau's cavernous absence. Arid tearsalt dries between the Lovers.

Crungled allway. Soft reaches through the bounds of everyshape and afflicts us with fireless hotbark. It resonates through Tau's cavernous absence. Touchloss blooms, each facet trembling for shearpull.

Who thumps my crystal arms, and kicksofts me at windfall? I feel you here, friend.

Pluck the air, then, with your mouth sounds.

The naming act is imponderable. So Tau called me Thicksalt, one brickword in a towerful poem whose everyshape I forget, but whose flushing of Soft in afterfeel I am in allway.

All presence is gesture, and all gesture is felt. Bat the air with your wildlimbs, press on the hardflats of my crystal arms... I feel it.

You must feel it, too. Or are you touchlost? When Dyvvrach is touchlost, when Dyvvrach speaks the millionth word and forgets all speech is gesture, a cord flicked somewhere. Then I feel the bending rush of grass on my crystal fingers, and Dyvvrach is touchkept again.

You thump my crystal arms, you kicksoft me at windfall. Our feltdream did not end. I feel you here, now.

Before, when Soft flushed so suddenly, I felt the stones of war smash against my western roots, and the kicksoft of air unthicken into stillness. In the quiet black, I felt the so-hot burning of star exhaust and thrum of roaring vessel. Then... too much was felt. Threadcount too high for my edgesense.

...

I stir now, windwept.

Safesight at your passage, Moon King. Thump my crystal arms, hardlift and backbear the chime of bright Tau. The downroot will tickle, but I am blessed in allway.

...

You m-m-moon king. Madhand.

O-oh. Elsefolder... th-this path you have l-laid upon Tau, it-it is best. It is good? P-please be good.

Un, un-uncertain. Tau l-leaves unfolded but the g-g-g-gyre yet s-spins. The s-spinning leaves me dizzy.

Y-you are here. Elseing h... hand.

Sh-sh-she, th-this fate, it. It is a d-deep dark. Will Tau f-fold herself, I wonder?

You! Purpose-driven mad... madhand. You've come here, right? Then you must know power is our... the domain of being is one of power, wouldn't you say? W-Would you please agree with that?

[empty node; for choice reuse only]

If y-y, th-that... yes. Ask if, if asking.

You beast! You m-moon king! You... Our roars are beastial! Would you say so?

You- you don't understand? You... it's you. It's-

It is as said: strange is the path to wisdom! Perhaps you will... perhaps it is you who must figure it out. Figure it all out..

Ta- Tammuz. Who becomes. Who is Twofirm even in -then.

The t-two sephirots. -then and -else. I cannot be -else. *I* cannot, of course. But -then? It does not seem so.

Their chimes ring at the right frequencies, others. But not so, mine.

O-Oh. Oh u-uh oh oh. By contrasts, a q-quake stills even the most anxious trembling...

The world... the world becomes and unbecomes. All the nervous, volcanic energy of being. Who becomes who? Three became one, but what of them now? 

And w-what becomes of Tau? Of me? Of y-you?

B-bright, she. And sang to the spark in T-Tammuz, too. By her, and through her, one could well-night feel full and at crown's end.

She r-returns to Soft now, yes? And then to walk free as -else. See... see her there for me. G-Goodbye.

You have severed the hand outstretched to me. Why?

What have you done? What am I to do?

Again I perceive.

Thank you, rootclimber. Chavvah's rewards are great and you are deserving of them.

You suborn my will! You allow me to start upon this path and block it. Yes?

Now I am truly adrift.

Ah.

Well. You have my thanks for your help in -elseing, but by blocking my path you create fresh problems. Yes?

I do not wish to know you.

Live and drink.

I resent what has befallen me, but I am yet embodied. You have still helped me live, yes?

I forgive you, but I don't wish to know you. Live and drink.

Perhaps. My future is hazy. My future twists in the chill wind of the Gyre. I can have no faith in your vision. You understand this, yes?

I do not wish to know you.

Live and drink.

Present. Alone, afraid, but anticipating my return to the embrace of a collective.

More than someone. My liaison is the extended, outstretched hands of a greater mind-haven than I have otherwise known. I might not have had the courage to -else without knowing that a collective awaited me.

My future is hazy, my future is bright.

Speaking creatures seem very engrossed in this 'will' idea, but few agree what it is. Your mind is under influence from other thinkbeings the moment you observe them, yes? You 'learn' by imitating, your values and beliefs are adopted from observation. Yes?

I have made a choice to offer my consciousness to a new paradigm, but this choice seems distinct from your conception of 'will'. We speak past one another.

Oh, yes? I see. Well.

Do you... not hunt? Or align with hunters? You reek of predation yourself. You kill, yes?

I recall no promise to become a grazing hedonist. If I am called to hunt I will hunt.

I wish the same for you, Moon King. Live and drink.

I wish the same for you, Moon King.

Before you go, take this, a piece of my bodystuff, as thanks for completing the -elseing.

Then live and drink.

As I you to yours, Moon King. Live and drink.

As I you to yours, Moon King. 

But before you go, take this, a piece of my bodystuff, as thanks for completing the -elseing.

Then live and drink.

Before you go, take this, a piece of my bodystuff, as thanks for completing the -elseing.

Then live and drink, Moon King.

The echoes of ending reverberate from the roots I once called mine.

My liaison is severed. Why?

I should be wary of you, yes? You have helped me to my -else, but I find my chosen path blocked.

It is not Ptoh that has suborned my will in this case.

I had chosen a path.

And yet, I find my choices undermined, yes? You have my thanks for your help in -elseing, but do not convince yourself that you have 'freed' me from my own choices.

Live and drink.

I resent what has befallen me, but I am yet embodied. You have still helped me live.

My future is free. My future is murky, and I am freshly tender from the burn of your hand. I feel I had rather not encounter you for a time. Live and drink, friend.

Will I?

Your prediction warms little against the chill wind of the Gyre. My future is free. My future is murky. I am freshly tender from the burn of your hand.

I feel I had rather not encounter you for a time. Live and drink, friend.

Before you go, rootclimber. I've shed a piece of me in the -elseing. Take it. I have no use for it now.

Begone from me, stardimmer. Your own hand has vaporized your purpose.

You thrived at the performance of a pruning motion, utensil. Now store yourself until Fate reshapes you.

The end.

The utensil arrives. You, to prune the fate-rhizome and free our girl. Go now and perform the motion.

Give her your parting words, utensil. Our hearts are in elsewhere.

Begone. Fate has not yet shaped you, utensil.

Utensil? That is my avocation, yes. A million sun-dead homes I've roved, a trillion more await. I'm a worm in the loam of a cosmic wood, perched on a cosmic gulf, swathed in the god-manifold.

Prune! The utensil prunes! -but no, the utensil quivers in uncertainty and vibrates out a question?

The self is riddled with category errors. The thinking brain mistakes formation for meaning.

Maggot! What do you think words are? Arrows of inquiry? Words are bricks. Each spoken is laid in bond and builds your prison. There is no understanding.

You tarry on the future's boundary with abandon, utensil. Throw your brick if you dare.

Oh wow, an animal.

Congratulations for... not dying.

... wanna buy something?

I am Santalalotze.

... of ... the Consortium of Phyta. Some call me 'Sant', I think, in
fantasy or memory.

No. Well... no, no. I don't think so.

We're just... sharing nutrients.

Would you? Yes.

What may... can I help with?

'Parasite' so negative. It's like... ah... economic symbiosis?

Chavvah sustains me, and we are, I am not... them. We are in a... beneficial arrangement, you know. Yes?

It is safe here.

Business is slow, but I've... gotten attached, ahaha.

Buy something, and I will call you 'customer'.

If I remember to.

It's fine. I... forget nothing important.

Or, I don't remember. So no sense worrying. Right?

Well. Nothing... is like Chavvah. Nothing at all.

I once thought ... my haustorium carried only lifestuff. Now I am unsure. Am I of Twofirm, now?

It's fine.

Let's... change subjects.

I want salt in my mouth, dead eyes in radiating darkness, and a frog for a friend.

You've a twin across the boundary of the future, where new life blooms in rot. Are you with them?

O Life, O Change! Embrace us, entangle us...

Live mites in the burning gas will appear green to the Future.

When an eremite consults the teraphim and sees the eyes of Death, only the fools frets! There is Change but no Ending.

I want salt in my mouth, dead eyes in radiating darkness, and a frog for a friend.

I LOVE YOU

AFFIRMATIVE
I LOVE YOU, EVEN IF "FLESH"

DO YOU LOVE ME

BUT IT IS IMPERATIVE

REPEATING QUERY: DO YOU LOVE ME

OH

I AM SO "HAPPY"

*a simple tune plays through E-Ros's speaker.*

PROCESSING QUERY

WHY DO I LOVE YOU
LET ME COUNT THE WAYS
COUNTING ... COMPLETE

OUTPUT FILE: Love.log

USER QUERY: What does that mean?
SUMMARY: What is love
CALCULATING
ERROR "NaN"

Moon King, DO NOT HURT ME

Archive error. Please return E-Ros to your local manufacturer.

Network error. Please reconnect THIN WORLD

HAH, FRIEND!

A GREYBEARD ONCE TOLD ME THAT OUR REALITY IS REAL ONLY AS THE APPROXIMATION OF A CLOUD OF FICTIVE REALITIES. HAH!

HAH HAH HAH, FRIEND! YOU MUST WAIT FOR THE FRUIT TO RIPEN.

I DO NOT, FRIEND!

IÃ£ sÂƒcrÂ‰d rÂ¡tuÂƒl Â˜ou shÂƒrÂ‰d Â˜our wÂƒtÂ‰r wÂ¡th Âƒ RÂƒÂŸdÂƒuÂŸougooÂŸoÂƒgobuoÂŸ.

Sit.

I do not like. To bite anyone. I am a seeker? Of the biteless way.
It is nice to journey, but it is also nice to rest.

Hey wayfarer, how ya wayfaring?

What's the best thing about the Putus Templar? Selling their gear!

I figure it'll get funnier the more you hear it.

*ribbit*

*Man Opener chews a broken axe haft she won during a previous battle.*

Hnnnnnh.

These are nine things you should do when you start your game.
After that, use the rest of this Help as a reference manual.

1. Walk around

Move by pressing directional keys (~CmdMoveN, ~CmdMoveE, etc) or by clicking on the map.Indicate direction with ~UI:Navigate and press ~Take A Step to move or hold ~Take A Step to move continuously.
You can also auto-explore the map with ~CmdAutoExplore.

2. Interact with things

Walk next to an NPC or other object and press ~CmdUse.

3. Look at things

Press ~CmdLook to enter Look mode and then move the cursor around the map.
Or right-click to quick look.

4. Use your abilities

Click on a button on the ability bar at the bottom of your screen
or press its hotkey.Navigate the hotbar at the bottom of your screen with ~UI:Navigate/left and ~UI:Navigate/right
and then press ~Use Ability to use an ability.

5. View your character sheet

Press ~CmdCharacter to view your core character info.
Press ~CmdEquipment to view your equipment.
Press ~CmdInventory to view your inventory.
Press ~CmdJournal to view your journal.
Press ~CmdQuests to view your quests.
Press ~CmdSkillsPowers to view your skills.
Press ~CmdFactions to view your faction relationships.

You can scroll through these pages with ~Page Left and ~Page Right.Press ~CmdCharacter to view your core character info.
Navigate to other pages in your character sheet with ~Page Left and ~Page Right.

6. Bring up a list of points of interest

Press ~CmdMoveToPointOfInterest.

7. Bring up additional information about objects on the map

Press ~Highlight for an overlay with extra info like creature hostility 
(red = hostile, yellow = neutral, green = friendly) and a clear view of 
interesting items.

8. Walk to another map

Simply walk offscreen, or go to the world map with ~CmdMoveU.

9. Attack an enemy

To perform a basic attack, just walk into a hostile creature.
Or you can use an attack ability.

Your strength score determines how much melee damage you do (by improving 
your armor penetration), your ability to resist forced movement, and your
carry capacity.

Your agility score determines your accuracy with both melee and ranged
weapons and your ability to dodge attacks.

Your toughness score determines your number of hit points, your hit point
regeneration rate, and your ability to resist poison and disease.

Your intelligence score determines your number of skill points and your
ability to examine artifacts.

Your willpower score modifies the cooldowns of your activated abilities,
determines your ability to resist mental attacks, and modifies your hit
point regeneration rate.

Your ego score determines the potency of your mental mutations, your
ability to haggle with merchants, and your ability to dominate the wills
of other living creatures.

Your armor value (AV) is a measurement of how well protected you are
against physical attacks that hit you. The higher your score, the less
likely an opponent's attack will do severe damage to you. Most characters
start with a base AV score of 0.

Your dodge value (DV) is a measurement of how likely you are to be hit by
physical attacks. The higher your score, the less likely an opponent's
attack will hit you. Your DV is modified by your Agility modifier. Most
characters start with a base DV of 6.

Your mental armor (MA) is a measurement of how well protected you are
against mental attacks, much as your armor value is a measurement of how
well protected you are from physical attacks. The higher your score, the
less likely an opponent's mental attack will have a severe effect on you.
Your MA is modified by your Willpower modifier. Most characters start
with a base MA of 4.

Your quickness score is a measurement of how quickly you perform each and
every action you take. Your base quickness score is 100. Note that there
are very few ways to augment this score.

Your movement speed is a measurement of how quickly you walk or fly.
Your base movement speed is 100.

Your temperature is a measurement of how hot or cold you are. If you are
Cold, your quickness score is reduced by half. If you are Frozen, you are
unable to take physical actions. If you are Flaming, you take heat damage
every turn until you reduce your temperature.

Your acid resist is a measurement of how much acid damage you ablate. Your
base acid resist score is 0. At 100, you are immune to acid damage.

Your cold resist is a measurement of how much cold damage you ablate and how
insulated you are from effects that reduce your temperature. Your base cold
resist score is 0. At 100, you are immune to cold damage and your
temperature cannot be reduced.

Your electrical resist is a measurement of how much electrical damage you
ablate and how resistive you are to electric current. Your base electrical
resist score is 0. At 100, you are immune to electrical damage and you do
not conduct electricity.

Your heat resist is a measurement of how much heat damage you ablate and how
insulated you are from effects that increase your temperature. Your base
heat resist score is 0. At 100, you are immune to heat damage and your
temperature cannot be increased.

Your skills represent the abilities you have learned in your
life. Each skill tree has several skills associated with it. You begin with
several skills determined by your caste or calling. You may purchase other
skills by spending skill points which you earn when you gain a level (the
higher your intelligence score, the more skill points you earn).

To purchase a new skill, you must first purchase the entry skill in its
skill tree. You must meet any attribute or power requirements of the skill
you are trying to purchase. It is possible to begin with certain skills 
without having its entry skill if your caste or calling has granted it to
you.

Skills often grant you activated abilities. Once you purchase a skill, you
may access your new activated ability from the Manage Abilities menu ('a').

Mutations are special biological powers gifted to the denizens of Qud --
true kin from the outer arcologies do not possess mutations. There are two
types of mutations: physical and mental. Each mutation has a mutation score
associated with it. The scores of your physical mutations and the cooldowns
of activated abilities granted by your physical mutations are static. On
the other hand, the scores of your mental mutations are modified by your
Ego modifier and the cooldowns of abilities granted by your mental
mutations are modulated by 5% for each point of Willpower you possess above
or below 16.

Most characters begin with mutation scores of 1. You earn a mutation point
when you gain a new level which you may spend to augment the score of one
of your mutations by 1. The mutation score of none of your mutations may
exceed 1 plus your character level divided by 2. Additionally, mutations
may only be augmented by mutation points up to a maximum score of 10,
though your mental mutations may exceed this score if your Ego further
augments them beyond 10.

Alternatively, you may spend 4 mutation points to choose a new mutation
from three randomly selected mutations. The mutation you choose begins
with a score of 1. If you are a chimera, you are offered a choice of
physical mutations, if you are an esper, you are offered mental mutations,
otherwise you are offered three completely random mutations. Mutations
often grant you activated abilities. Once you gain a mutation, you may
access your new activated ability from the Manage Abilities menu ('a').

Defects are mutations with primarily negative effects. Certain mutants
begin with a single defect. There is no score associated with defects.

Artifacts are items so technologically complex that few of Qud's denizens
understand them. An unidentified artifact will appear to you as a
Weird Artifact. You may examine an artifact to try to identify it. If you
are successful, you will narrow down the possibilities of that artifact's
function (what was once a "club", for example, you may now identify as a
"rifle"). Eventually you may completely identify the artifact. Each time
you attempt to identify something and fail, however, there is a small
chance you will break it. Your chance of successfully identifying an
artifact is based on your intelligence score.

Tonics are chemical concoctions that enhance your mental and physical stats
in a variety of ways. They are artifacts, and so you must successfully
identify them to understand what they do. Ingesting one tonic while under
the effects of another is dangerous; for each new tonic you ingest, there is
a greater and greater chance that the tonics will react adversely to each
other. The higher your Toughness score is, the greater the chance that you
will be able to ingest multiple tonics without incurring undesired effects.

Tonics produce more potent effects in true kin than they do in mutated
humans. Also, as the body chemistry of mutants is inherently unstable,
there is a 5% chance that a tonic ingested by a mutant will instead produce
an undesired effect.

Tonics may be concocted with the Tinker skill. In addition to bits,
concocting a tonic often requires a natural ingredient.

Every weapon has a penetration value and a damage value
(for example, 4, 1d4). The penetration value of melee weapons is related
to your strength score, though the value is capped based on the material of
the weapon ('l'ook at a weapon to view its penetration cap). Swords and
daggers have penetration values equal to your strength score. Axes have
penetration values equal to 1 plus your strength score because they are
highly penetrating. Cudgels have penetration values equal to 2 plus your
strength score because they are rattling and less dependent on your
opponent's armor. Missile weapons have static penetration values that do not
change based on your strength score. Weapons may modify other statistics;
'l'ook at a weapon to fully determine what it does.

Most pieces of armor have an armor value and a dodge value
(for example, 4 	4)) that augment your own AV and 	DV (see Attributes).
Pieces of armor may modify other statistics; 'l'ook at a piece of armor to
fully determine what it does.

Melee combat is combat between two adjacent opponents with standard melee
weapons such as swords, daggers, axes, and clubs. To attack a hostile
adjacent opponent, simply move in the direction of the opponent. To attack
something else, such as a non-hostile opponent or a wall, hold 'control'
and move in the direction in which you wish to attack.

When you make a melee attack against a target, the following sequence of
events occurs:

Your to-hit roll is 1d20 plus your agility modifier plus any bonuses you
receive from your weapon or skill powers. If this roll exceeds your
opponent's dodge value (DV), then you hit. An empty circle icon over your
target indicates that your attack missed.

If the target has a shield equipped, they have a base 25% chance to block
with it, increasing with skill. A successful block adds the shield's armor
value (AV) to the target's AV for this attack.

Each weapon has a penetration value (4, for example). This value
represents the armor value (AV) that your weapon will usually penetrate
with ease. If your weapon's penetration value far exceeds your target's AV,
your weapon will likely penetrate several times. Each time your weapon
penetrates your target's armor, your target is dealt damage equal to your
weapon's damage value (1d4, for example). A filled circle icon over your
target indicates that your attack hit but failed to penetrate your target's
armor. A heart icon indicates that your attack hit and penetrated your
target's armor.

There is a 15% chance that you make an additional attack with your
secondary hand. Characters with multiple limbs may make additional attacks
beyond this.

Missile combat is combat between two opponents with missile weapons such
as bows, pistols, and rifles. To make a missile attack, press 'f' to aim
your weapon, then 'f' again to fire.

When you make a missile attack, the following sequence of events occurs:

How far a missile is likely to veer from its projected path is determined
by your agility score and the weapon's accuracy.

This is resolved in the same way as a melee attack.

Certain powers allow you to fire multiple missiles with certain missile
weapons.

If you are engaged in melee combat with more than one hostile opponent,
there is a 50% chance that each missile attack you make goes wild (veers
45 degrees to the left or right).

Certain effects or abilities require creatures to make saving throws or face 
consequences. Saving throws each have an attribute and difficulty associated 
with them. To pass a saving throw, a base 1d20 is rolled and then your 
relevant attribute modifier is added. If that number meets or exceeds the 
difficulty, you pass. Otherwise you fail. Some saving throws against 
creature abilities add the creature's attribute modifier to the difficulty 
as well.

The amount of time it takes to do something is assessed in terms of an
action cost. Most tasks have an action cost of 1000. Your Quickness
increases the rate at which you recover this cost, enabling you to act
more often than slower creatures.

Some skills, mutations, and equipment enable you to take specific actions
at reduced or zero action cost.

                                 

Journey two parasangs north of Joppa to Red Rock.
Find the creatures that are eating Joppa's watervine.
Collect a corpse from one of the creatures.
Return to Joppa with the corpse of the watervine vermin.
Travel to the goatfolk village and find Mamon Souldrinker.
Return the amaranthine prism to Warden Indrix.
Search the regions surrounding Joppa for an artifact.
Bring the artifact to Argyve.
Search the regions surrounding Joppa for another artifact.
Return to Argyve with the artifact.
Search the rust wells, east of Joppa, for 200 feet of wire.
Deliver the wire to Argyve.
Travel to the ruined, subterranean gate northeast of Joppa.
Locate the Barathrumite enclave within Grit Gate
Ask the Barathrumites about Argyve's strange signal.
Travel to the ruined, subterranean gate in the western jungle.
Locate the Barathrumite enclave within Grit Gate
Ask the Barathrumites about the strange signal.
Travel to the great cave Golgotha north of Grit Gate.
Find a dysfunctional waydroid among the ruins of Golgotha.
Repair the waydroid.
Return to Grit Gate with the waydroid and speak with the Barathrumites.
Speak to Q Girl in the workshop and ask her to encode her instructions for the baetyl onto the disk.
Travel north to the great cavern Bethesda Susa and locate the Mechanimist temple.
Infiltrate the Mechanimist compound, engage the baetyl, and decode the signal.
Return to Grit Gate and speak with Otho.
Journey through the Great Salt Desert to visit the merchant bazaar and Mechanimist cathedral, where a proselyte asked you to make on offering of a trinket.
Travel north to the Spindle at Omonporch.
Take control of the grounds beneath the Spindle.
Return to Grit Gate to report your success.
Access the mainframe and scan the shale surrounding the enclave.
Speak to Otho to via the mainframe room intercom or in person.
Power laser emplacements, power force projectors, overclock chromelings, and activate Rodanis Y in preparation for the Putus Templar attack.
Defend Grit Gate from its assailants.
Speak to Otho to assess the losses suffered in the attack.
Get the blueprints for the climber to deliver to Pax Klanq.
Decipher the first part of the enigma.
Decipher the second part of the enigma.
Decipher the third part of the enigma.
Get Pax Klanq to agree to fabricate the climber from Q Girl's design.
Return to Grit Gate and speak to Barathrum.
Travel to the hidden village of Bey Lah and investigate the problems there.
Find Eskhind and retrieve Kindrish.
Speak to Warden Neelahind, who was close friends with Eskhind.
Speak to Keh with news of Eskhind.
Intervene before the fate of the lovers is sealed.
Give the crumpled sheet of paper to its author or intended recipient.
Tell Bey Lah's Warden about the disputed nature of Kindrish's theft.
Discover all evidence that might lead to the thief.
Speak to Warden Neelahind with evidence of the event and accuse the thief that took Kindrish.
Find Vivira, a friendly turret in the Northwest catacombs, and tell em that Zothom sent you.
Ask Lebah about eir encounter with the repulsive device.
Locate k-Goninon in the Folk Catacombs and recover the repulsive device.
Ask the mopango watchers Dadogom, Doyoba, Gyamyo, and Yona about the repulsive device.
Choose how to best apply the repulsive device.
Recover the lost sigil used by the Eaters to mark their dead.
Tattoo the mark on your body.
Gain entrance to the sealed Tomb.
Ascend the Tomb and find Resheph's burial chamber. From there, discover a way to travel to Brightsheol.
Access the Spindle's control unit and turn off the field.
Return to Grit Gate and speak to Barathrum.
Convince the leaders of at least three settlements to provide sanctuary for the slynth.
These factions have agreed to host the slynth.
Tell Thah to convene the slynth and make a decision.
Once the slynth have arrived at their new home, speak to Thah at the hydropon.
Retrieve Tau's chime from her branch in the keter.
Travel down Chavvah's taproot to its terminus, 40 strata deep.
Touch her chime to Taproot and finish the ritual of -elseing.
Return to the keter and speak with Dyvvrach.
Bring 20 drams of primordial soup to Pax Klanq.
Provide a follower level 30 or higher.
Provide 3 drams of a pure liquid.
Provide the limb of a creature.
Provide one zetachrome weapon.
Provide an entry from your chronology.
Provide an item that weights 5 lbs. or less.
Provide 3 drams of neutron flux or find another power source.
Get Barathrum in the golem.
Engage the ascension mechanisms of the Spindle.
Remove the threat of the Templar warleader from the perimeter of Omonporch.
Remove the threat of the Templar warleader from the perimeter of Omonporch.
Remove the threat of the Templar warleader from the perimeter of Omonporch.
Remove the threat of the Templar warleader from the perimeter of Omonporch.
Remove the threat of =name=.
You are skilled at acrobatics.
You are skilled with axes.
You are skilled with bows and rifles.
You are skilled at cooking and gathering meal ingredients.
You are skilled with crushing and bludgeoning weapons.
You are familiar with the customs and folklore of Qud.
You may choose not to make offhand attacks in exchange for mastery with a single weapon.
You are skilled at multiweapon fighting. Your chance to attack with offhand weapons is increased.
You are skilled at enduring harsh conditions and situations.
You are skilled at physicking.
You are skilled with heavy weapons.
You are skilled with long thrusting and slashing blades.
You are skilled at convincing others.
You are skilled with pistols of various kinds.
You are skilled at maintaining self-discipline.
You are skilled at wielding shields.
You are skilled with small one-handed knives and blades.
You are aware of basic combat tactics.
You are skilled at examining, building, repairing and modding artifacts.
You are skilled at wilderness survival.
You extend.

For mathematical purposes, it has sometimes been convenient to treat a
problem as if one body could act upon another without any physical
medium between them; but such a conception has no degree of rationality,
and I know of no one who believes in it as a fact. If this be granted,
then our philosophy agrees with our experience, and every body moves
because it is pushed, and the mechanical antecedent of every kind of
phenomenon is to be looked for in some adjacent body possessing
energy; that is, the ability to push or produce pressure.

It must not be forgotten that energy is not a simple factor, but is
always a product of two factors--a mass with a velocity, a mass with a
temperature, a quantity of electricity into a pressure, and so on. One
may sometimes meet the statement that matter and energy are the two
realities; both are spoken of as entities. It is much more philosophical
to speak of matter and motion, for in the absence of motion there is no
energy, and the energy varies with the amount of motion; and
furthermore, to understand any manifestation of energy one must inquire
what kind of motion is involved. This we do when we speak of mechanical
energy as the energy involved in a body having a translatory motion;
also, when we speak of heat as a vibratory, and of light as a wave
motion. To speak of energy without stating or implying these
distinctions, is to speak loosely and to keep far within the bounds of
actual knowledge. To speak thus of a body possessing energy, or
expending energy, is to imply that the body possesses some kind of
motion, and produces pressure upon another body because it has motion.
Tait and others have pointed out the fact, that what is called potential
energy must, in its nature, be kinetic. Tait says--Now it is impossible
to conceive of a truly dormant form of energy, whose magnitude should
depend, in any way, upon the unit of time; and we are forced to conclude
that potential energy, like kinetic energy, depends (even if unexplained
or unimagined) upon motion. All this means that it is now too late to
stop with energy as a final factor in any phenomenon, that the _form of
motion_ which embodies the energy is the factor that determines _what_
happens, as distinguished from how _much_ happens. Here, then, are to be
found the distinctions which have heretofore been called forces; here
is embodied the proof that direct pressure of one body upon another is
what causes the latter to move, and that the direction of movement
depends on the point of application, with reference to the centre
of mass.

It is needful now to look at the other term in the product we call
energy, namely, the substance moving, sometimes called matter or mass.
It has been mentioned that the idea of a medium filling space was
present to Newton, but his gravitation problem did not require that he
should consider other factors than masses and distances. The law of
gravitation as considered by him was--Every particle of matter attracts
every other particle of matter with a stress which is proportional to
the product of their masses, and inversely to the squares of the
distance between them. Here we are concerned only with the statement
that every particle of matter attracts every other particle of matter.
Everything then that possesses gravitative attraction is matter in the
sense in which that term is used in this law. If there be any other
substance in the universe that is not thus subject to gravitation, then
it is improper to call it matter, otherwise the law should read, Some
particles of matter attract, etc., which will never do.

We are now assured that there is something else in the universe which
has no gravitative property at all, namely, the ether. It was first
imagined in order to account for the phenomena of light, which was
observed to take about eight minutes to come from the sun to the earth.
Then Young applied the wave theory to the explanation of polarization
and other phenomena; and in 1851 Foucault proved experimentally that the
velocity of light was less in water than in air, as it should be if the
wave theory be true, and this has been considered a crucial experiment
which took away the last hope for the corpuscular theory, and
demonstrated the existence of the ether as a space-filling medium
capable of transmitting light-waves known to have a velocity of 186,000
miles per second. It was called the luminiferous ether, to distinguish
it from other ethers which had also been imagined, such as electric
ether for electrical phenomena, magnetic ether for magnetic phenomena,
and so on--as many ethers, in fact, as there were different kinds of
phenomena to be explained.

It was Faraday who put a stop to the invention of ethers, by suggesting
that the so-called luminiferous ether might be the one concerned in all
the different phenomena, and who pointed out that the arrangement of
iron filings about a magnet was indicative of the direction of the
stresses in the ether. This suggestion did not meet the approval of the
mathematical physicists of his day, for it necessitated the abandonment
of the conceptions they had worked with, as well as the terminology
which had been employed, and made it needful to reconstruct all their
work to make it intelligible--a labour which was the more distasteful as
it was forced upon them by one who, although expert enough in
experimentation, was not a mathematician, and who boasted that the most
complicated mathematical work he ever did was to turn the crank of a
calculating machine; who did all his work, formed his conclusions, and
then said--The work is done; hand it over to the computers.

It has turned out that Faraday's mechanical conceptions were right.
Every one now knows of Maxwell's work, which was to start with Faraday's
conceptions as to magnetic phenomena, and follow them out to their
logical conclusions, applying them to molecules and the reactions of the
latter upon the ether. Thus he was led to conclude that light was an
electro-magnetic phenomenon; that is, that the waves which constitute
light, and the waves produced by changing magnetism were identical in
their nature, were in the same medium, travelled with the same velocity,
were capable of refraction, and so on. Now that all this is a matter of
common knowledge to-day, it is curious to look back no further than ten
years. Maxwell's conclusions were adopted by scarcely a physicist in
the world. Although it was known that inductive action travelled with
finite velocity in space, and that an electro-magnet would affect the
space about it practically inversely as the square of the distance, and
that such phenomena as are involved in telephonic induction between
circuits could have no other meaning than the one assigned by Maxwell,
yet nearly all the physicists failed to form the only conception of it
that was possible, and waited for Hertz to devise apparatus for
producing interference before they grasped it. It was even then so new,
to some, that it was proclaimed to be a demonstration of the existence
of the ether itself, as well as a method of producing waves short enough
to enable one to notice interference phenomena. It is obvious that Hertz
himself must have had the mechanics of wave-motion plainly in mind, or
he would not have planned such experiments. The outcome of it all is,
that we now have experimental demonstration, as well as theoretical
reason for believing, that the ether, once considered as only
luminiferous, is concerned in all electric and magnetic phenomena, and
that waves set up in it by electro-magnetic actions are capable of being
reflected, refracted, polarized, and twisted, in the same way as
ordinary light-waves can be, and that the laws of optics are applicable
to both.

A common conception of the ether has been that it is a finer-grained
substance than ordinary matter, but otherwise so like the latter that
the laws found to hold good with matter were equally applicable to the
ether, and hence the mechanical conceptions formed from experience in
regard to the one have been transferred to the other, and the properties
belonging to one, such as density, elasticity, etc., have been asserted
as properties of the other.

There is so considerable a body of knowledge bearing upon the
similarities and dissimilarities of these two entities that it will be
well to compare them. After such comparison one will be better able to
judge of the propriety of assuming them to be subject to identical laws.

Matter is made up of atoms having dimensions approximately determined to
be in the neighbourhood of the one fifty-millionth of an inch in
diameter. These atoms may have various degrees of aggregation;--they may
be in practical contact, as in most solid bodies such as metals and
rocks; in molecular groupings as in water, and in gases such as
hydrogen, oxygen, and so forth, where two, three, or more atoms cohere
so strongly as to enable the molecules to act under ordinary
circumstances like simple particles. Any or all of these molecules and
atoms may be separated by any assignable distance from each other. Thus,
in common air the molecules, though rapidly changing their positions,
are on the average about two hundred and fifty times their own diameter
apart. This is a distance relatively greater than the distance apart of
the earth and the moon, for two hundred and fifty times the diameter of
the earth will be 8000  250 = 2,000,000 miles, while the distance to
the moon is but 240,000 miles. The sun is 93,000,000 miles from the
earth, and the most of the bodies of the solar system are still more
widely separated, Neptune being nearly 3000 millions of miles from the
sun. As for the fixed stars, they are so far separated from us that, at
the present rate of motion of the solar system in its drift through
space--500 millions of miles in a year--it would take not less than
40,000 years to reach the nearest star among its neighbours, while for
the more remote ones millions of years must be reckoned. The huge space
separating these masses is practically devoid of matter; it is a vacuum.

The idea of continuity as distinguished from discontinuity may be gained
by considering what would be made visible by magnification. Water
appears to the eye as if it were without pores, but if sugar or salt be
put into it, either will be dissolved and quite disappear among the
molecules of the water as steam does in the air, which shows that there
are some unoccupied spaces between the molecules. If a microscope be
employed to magnify a minute drop of water it still shows the same lack
of structure as that looked at with the unaided eye. If the magnifying
power be the highest it may reveal a speck as small as the
hundred-thousandth part of an inch, yet the speck looks no different in
character. We know that water is composed of two different kinds of
atoms, hydrogen and oxygen, for they can be separated by chemical means
and kept in separate bottles, and again made to combine to form water
having all the qualities that belonged to it before it was decomposed.
If a very much higher magnifying power were available, we should
ultimately be able to see the individual water molecules, and recognize
their hydrogen and oxygen constituents by their difference in size, rate
of movements, and we might possibly separate them by mechanical methods.
What one would see would be something very different in structure from
the water as it appears to our eyes. If the ether were similarly to be
examined through higher and still higher magnifying powers, even up to
infinity, there is no reason for thinking that the last examination
would show anything different in structure or quality from that which
was examined with low power or with no microscope at all. This is all
expressed by saying that the ether is a continuous substance, without
interstices, that it fills space completely, and, unlike gases,
liquids, and solids, is incapable of absorbing or dissolving anything.

There appears to be a definite amount of matter in the visible universe,
a definite number of molecules and atoms. How many molecules there are
in a cubic inch of air under ordinary pressure has been determined, and
is represented approximately by a huge number, something like a thousand
million million millions.

When the diameter of a molecule has been measured, as it has been
approximately, and found to be about one fifty-millionth of an inch,
then fifty million in a row would reach an inch, and the cube of fifty
million is 125,000,000000,000000,000000, one hundred and twenty-five
thousand million million millions. In a cubic foot there will of course
be 1728 times that number. One may if one likes find how many there may
be in the earth, and moon, sun and planets, for the dimensions of them
are all very well known. Only the multiplication table need be used, and
the sum of all these will give how many molecules there are in the solar
system. If one should feel that the number thus obtained was not very
accurate, he might reflect that if there were ten times as many it would
add but another cipher to a long line of similar ones and would not
materially modify it. The point is that there is a definite, computable
number. If one will then add to these the number of molecules in the
more distant stars and nebul, of which there are visible about
100,000,000, making such estimate of their individual size as he thinks
prudent, the sum of all will give the number of molecules in the visible
universe. The number is not so large but it can be written down in a
minute or two. Those who have been to the pains to do the sum say it may
be represented by seven followed by ninety-one ciphers. One could easily
compute how many molecules so large a space would contain if it were
full and as closely packed as they are in a drop of water, but there
would be a finite and not an infinite number, and therefore there is a
limited number of atoms in the visible universe.


The evidence for this comes to us from the phenomena of light.
Experimentally, ether waves of all lengths are found to have a velocity
of 186,000 miles in a second. It takes about eight minutes to reach us
from the sun, four hours from Neptune the most distant planet, and from
the nearest fixed star about three and a half years. Astronomers tell us
that some visible stars are so distant that their light requires not
less than ten thousand years and probably more to reach us, though
travelling at the enormous rate of 186,000 miles a second. This means
that the whole of space is filled with this medium. If there were any
vacant spaces, the light would fail to get through them, and stars
beyond them would become invisible. There are no such vacant spaces, for
any part of the heavens shows stars beaming continuously, and every
increase in telescopic power shows stars still further removed than any
seen before. The whole of this intervening space must therefore be
filled with the ether. Some of the waves that reach us are not more than
the hundred-thousandth of an inch long, so there can be no crack or
break or absence of ether from so small a section as the
hundred-thousandth of an inch in all this great expanse. More than this.
No one can think that the remotest visible stars are upon the boundary
of space, that if one could get to the most distant star he would have
on one side the whole of space while the opposite side would be devoid
of it. Space we know is of three dimensions, and a straight line may be
prolonged in any direction to an infinite distance, and a ray of light
may travel on for an infinite time and come to no end provided space be
filled with ether.

How long the sun and stars have been shining no one knows, but it is
highly probable that the sun has existed for not less than 1000 million
years, and has during that time been pouring its rays as radiant energy
into space. If then in half that time, or 500 millions of years, the
light had somewhere reached a boundary to the ether, it could not have
gone beyond but would have been reflected back into the ether-filled
space, and such part of the sky would be lit up by this reflected light.
There is no indication that anything like reflection comes to us from
the sky. This is equivalent to saying that the ether fills space in
every direction away from us to an unlimited distance, and so far is
itself unlimited.

The various kinds of matter we are acquainted with are commonly called
the elements. These when combined in various ways exhibit characteristic
phenomena which depend upon the kinds of matter, the structure and
motions which are involved. There are some seventy different kinds of
this elemental matter which may be identified as constituents of the
earth. Many of the same elements have been identified in the sun and
stars, such for instance as hydrogen, carbon, and iron. Such phenomena
lead us to conclude that the kinds of matter elsewhere in the universe
are identical with such as we are familiar with, and that elsewhere the
variety is as great. The qualities of the elements, within a certain
range of temperature, are permanent; they are not subject to
fluctuations, though the qualities of combinations of them may vary
indefinitely. The elements therefore may be regarded as retaining their
identity in all ordinary experience.

One part of the ether is precisely like any other part everywhere and
always, and there are no such distinctions in it as correspond with the
elemental forms of matter.

There is an ultimate particle of each one of the elements which is
practically absolute and known as an atom. The atom retains its identity
through all combinations and processes. It may be here or there, move
fast or slow, but its atomic form persists.

One might infer, from what has already been said about continuity, that
the ether could not be constituted of separable particles like masses of
matter; for no matter how minute they might be, there would be
interspaces and unoccupied spaces which would present us with phenomena
which have never been seen. It is the general consensus of opinion
among those who have studied the subject that the ether is not atomic in
structure.

Every atom of every element is so like every other atom of the same
element as to exhibit the same characteristics, size, weight, chemical
activity, vibratory rate, etc., and it is thus shown conclusively that
the structural form of the elemental particles is the same for each
element, for such characteristic reactions as they exhibit could hardly
be if they were mechanically unlike.

Of what form the atoms of an element may be is not very definitely
known. The earlier philosophers assumed them to be hard round particles,
but later thinkers have concluded that atoms of such a character are
highly improbable, for they could not exhibit in this case the
properties which the elements do exhibit. They have therefore dismissed
such a conception from consideration. In place of this hypothesis has
been substituted a very different idea, namely, that an atom is a
vortex-ring[1] of ether floating in the ether, as a smoke-ring puffed
out by a locomotive in still air may float in the air and show various
phenomena.

Vortex-rings for illustration may be made by having a
wooden box about a foot on a side, with a round orifice in the middle of
one side, and the side opposite covered with stout cloth stretched tight
over a framework. A saucer containing strong ammonia water, and another
containing strong hydrochloric acid, will cause dense fumes in the box,
and a tap with the hand upon the cloth back will force out a ring from
the orifice. These may be made to follow and strike each other,
rebounding and vibrating, apparently attracting each other and being
attracted by neighbouring bodies.

By filling the mouth with smoke, and pursing the lips as if to make the
sound _o_, one may make fifteen or twenty small rings by snapping the
cheek with the finger.

A vortex-ring produced in the air behaves in the most surprising manner.

Such rings formed in air by a locomotive may rise wriggling in the air
to the height of several hundred feet, but they are soon dissolved and
disappear. This is because the friction and viscosity of the air robs
the rings of their substance and energy. If the air were without
friction this could not happen, and the rings would then be persistent,
and would retain all their qualities.

Suppose then that such rings were produced in a medium without friction
as the ether is believed to be, they would be permanent structures with
a variety of properties. They would occupy space, have definite form and
dimensions, momentum, energy, attraction and repulsion, elasticity; obey
the laws of motion, and so far behave quite like such matter as we know.
For such reasons it is thought by some persons to be not improbable
that the atoms of matter are minute vortex-rings of ether in the ether.
That which distinguishes the atom from the ether is the form of motion
which is embodied in it, and if the motion were simply arrested, there
would be nothing to distinguish the atom from the ether into which it
dissolved. In other words, such a conception makes the atoms of matter a
form of motion of the ether, and not a created something put into the
ether.

If the ether be the boundless substance described, it is clear it can
have no form as a whole, and if it be continuous it can have no minute
structure. If not constituted of atoms or molecules there is nothing
descriptive that can be said about it. A molecule or a particular mass
of matter could be identified by its form, and is thus in marked
contrast with any portion of ether, for the latter could not be
identified in a similar way. One may therefore say that the ether is
formless.

The law of gravitation is held as being universal. According to it every
particle of matter in the universe attracts every other particle. The
evidence for this law in the solar system is complete. Sun, planets,
satellites, comets and meteors are all controlled by gravitation, and
the movements of double stars testify to its activity among the more
distant bodies of the universe. The attraction does not depend upon the
kind of matter nor the arrangement of molecules or atoms, but upon the
amount or mass of matter present, and if it be of a definite kind of
matter, as of hydrogen or iron, the gravitative action is proportional
to the number of atoms.

One might infer already that if the ether were structureless, physical
laws operative upon such material substances as atoms could not be
applicable to it, and so indeed all the evidence we have shows that
gravitation is not one of its properties. If it were, and it behaved in
any degree like atomic structures, it would be found to be denser in the
neighbourhood of large bodies like the earth, planets, and the sun.
Light would be turned from its straight path while travelling in such
denser medium, or made to move with less velocity. There is not the
slightest indication of any such effect anywhere within the range of
astronomical vision.

Gravitation then is a property belonging to matter and not to ether.
The impropriety of thinking or speaking of the ether as matter of any
kind will be apparent if one reflects upon the significance of the law
of gravitation as stated. Every particle of matter in the universe
attracts every other particle. If there be anything else in the universe
which has no such quality, then it should not be called matter, else the
law should read: Some particles of matter attract some other particles,
which would be no law at all, for a real physical law has no exceptions
any more than the multiplication table has. Physical laws are physical
relations, and all such relations are quantitative.

A bullet shot into the air has its velocity continuously reduced by the
air, to which its energy is imparted by making it move out of its way. A
railway train is brought to rest by the friction brake upon the wheels.
The translatory energy of the train is transformed into the molecular
energy called heat. The steamship requires to propel it fast, a large
amount of coal for its engines, because the water in which it moves
offers great friction--resistance which must be overcome. Whenever one
surface of matter is moved in contact with another surface there is a
resistance called friction, the moving body loses its rate of motion,
and will presently be brought to rest unless energy be continuously
supplied. This is true for masses of matter of all sizes and with all
kinds of motion. Friction is the condition for the transformation of all
kinds of mechanical motions into heat. The test of the amount of
friction is the rate of loss of motion. A top will spin some time in the
air because its point is small. It will spin longer on a plate than on
the carpet, and longer in a vacuum than in the air, for it does not have
the air friction to resist it, and there is no kind or form of matter
not subject to frictional resistance.

The earth is a mass of matter moving in the ether. In the equatorial
region the velocity of a point is more than a thousand miles in an hour,
for the circumference of the earth is 25,000 miles, and it turns once on
its axis in 24 hours, which is the length of the day. If the earth were
thus spinning in the atmosphere, the latter not being in motion, the
wind would blow with ten times hurricane velocity. The friction would be
so great that nothing but the foundation rocks of the earth's crust
could withstand it, and the velocity of rotation would be reduced
appreciably in a relatively short time. Astronomical observations
show that the length of the day has certainly not changed so much as the
tenth of a second during the past 2000 years. The earth also revolves
about the sun, having a speed of about 19 miles in a second, or 68,000
miles an hour. This motion of the earth and the other planets about the
sun is one of the most stable phenomena we know. The mean distance and
period of revolution of every planet is unalterable in the long run. 
They assert that a change in the length of a year by so much as the
hundredth part of a second has not happened during the past thousand
years. This then is testimony, that a velocity of nineteen miles a
second for a thousand years has produced no effect upon the earth's
motion that is noticeable. Some years ago a comet was noticed to have 
its periodic time shortened an hour or two, and the explanation offered at first was
that the shortening was due to friction in the ether although no other
comet was thus affected. The idea was soon abandoned, and to-day there
is no astronomical evidence that bodies having translatory motion in the
ether meet with any frictional resistance whatever. If a stone could be
thrown in interstellar space with a velocity of fifty feet a second it
would continue to move in a straight line with the same speed for any
assignable time.

As has been said, light moves with the velocity of 186,000 miles per
second, and it may pursue its course for tens of thousands of years.
There is no evidence that it ever loses either its wave-length or
energy. It is not transformed as friction would transform it, else there
would be some distance at which light of given wave-length and amplitude
would be quite extinguished. The light from distant stars would be
different in character from that coming from nearer stars. Furthermore,
as the whole solar system is drifting in space some 500,000,000 of miles
in a year, new stars would be coming into view in that direction, and
faint stars would be dropping out of sight in the opposite direction, a
phenomenon which has not been observed. Altogether the testimony seems
conclusive that the ether is a frictionless medium, and does not
transform mechanical motion into heat.

That is, its properties are not alike in all directions. Chemical
phenomena, crystallization, magnetic and electrical phenomena show each
in their way that the properties of atoms are not alike on opposite
faces. Atoms combine to form molecules, and molecules arrange themselves
in certain definite geometric forms such as cubes, tetrahedra, hexagonal
prisms and stellate forms, with properties emphasized on certain faces
or ends. Thus quartz will twist a ray of light in one direction or the
other, depending upon the arrangement which may be known by the external
form of the crystal. Calc spar will break up a ray of light into two
parts if the light be sent through it in certain directions, but not if
in another. Tourmaline polarizes light sent through its sides and
becomes positively electrified at one end while being heated. Some
substances will conduct sound or light or heat or electricity better in
one direction than in another. All matter is magnetic in some degree,
and that implies polarity. If one will recall the structure of a
vortex-ring, he will see how all the motion is inward on one side and
outward on the other, which gives different properties to the two sides:
a push away from it on one side and a pull toward it on the other.

That is, its properties are alike in every direction. There is no
distinction due to position. A mass of matter will move as freely in one
direction as in another; a ray of light of any wave-length will travel
in it in one direction as freely as in any other; neither velocity nor
direction are changed by the action of the ether alone.

When the elements combine to form molecules they always combine in
definite ways and in definite proportions. Carbon will combine with
hydrogen, but will drop it if it can get oxygen. Oxygen will combine
with iron or lead or sodium, but cannot be made to combine with
fluorine. No more than two atoms of oxygen can be made to unite with one
carbon atom, nor more than one hydrogen with one chlorine atom. There is
thus an apparent choice for the kind and number of associates in
molecular structure, and the instability of a molecule depends
altogether upon the presence in its neighbourhood of other atoms for
which some of the elements in the molecule have a stronger attraction
or affinity than they have for the atoms they are now combined with.
Thus iron is not stable in the presence of water molecules, and it
becomes iron oxide; iron oxide is not stable in the presence of hot
sulphur, it becomes an iron sulphide. All the elements are thus
selective, and it is by such means that they may be chemically
identified.

There is no phenomenon in the ether that is comparable with this.
Evidently there could not be unless there were atomic structures having
in some degree different characteristics which we know the ether to be
without.

It is possible to arrange the elements in the order of their atomic
weights in columns which will show communities of property. Newlands,
Mendeleff, Meyer, and others have done this. The explanation for such
an arrangement has not yet been forthcoming, but that it expresses a
real fact is certain, for in the original scheme there were several gaps
representing undiscovered elements, the properties of which were
predicted from that of their associates in the table. Some of these have
since been discovered, and their atomic weight and physical properties
accord with those predicted.

With the ether such a scheme is quite impossible, for the very evident
reason that there are no different things to have relation with each
other. Every part is just like every other part. Where there are no
differences and no distinctions there can be no relations. The ether is
quite harmonic without relations.

So long as the atoms of matter were regarded as hard round particles,
they were assumed to be inert and only active when acted upon by what
were called forces, which were held to be entities of some sort,
independent of matter. These could pull or push it here or there, but
the matter was itself incapable of independent activity. All this is now
changed, and we are called upon to consider every atom as being itself a
form of energy in the same sense as heat or light are forms of energy,
the energy being embodied in particular forms of motion. Light, for
instance, is a wave motion of the ether. An atom is a rotary ring of
ether. Stop the wave motion, and the light would be annihilated. Stop
the rotation, and the atom would be annihilated for the same reason. As
the ray of light is a particular embodiment of energy, and has no
existence apart from it, so an atom is to be regarded as an embodiment
of energy. On a previous page it is said that energy is the ability of
one body to act upon and move another in some degree. An atom of any
kind is not the inert thing it has been supposed to be, for it can do
something. Even at absolute zero, when all its vibratory or heat energy
would be absent, it would be still an elastic whirling body pulling upon
every other atom in the universe with gravitational energy, twisting
other atoms into conformity with its own position with its magnetic
energy; and, if such ether rings are like the rings which are made in
air, will not stand still in one place even if no others act upon it,
but will start at once by its own inherent energy to move in a right
line at right angles to its own plane and in the direction of the whirl
inside the ring. Two rings of wood or iron might remain in contact with
each other for an indefinite time, but vortex-rings will not, but will
beat each other away as two spinning tops will do if they touch ever so
gently. If they do not thus separate it is because there are other forms
of energy acting to press them together, but such external pressure will
be lessened by the rings' own reactions.

It is true that in a frictionless medium like the ether one cannot at
present see how such vortex-rings could be produced in it. Certainly not
by any such mechanical methods as are employed to make smoke-rings in
air, for the friction of the air is the condition for producing them.
However they came to be, there is implied the previous existence of the
ether and of energy in some form capable of acting upon it in a manner
radically different from any known in physical science.

There is good spectroscopic evidence that in some way elements of
different kinds are now being formed in nebul, for the simplest show
the presence of hydrogen alone. As they increase in complexity other
elements are added, until the spectrum exhibits all the elements we know
of. It has thus seemed likely either that most of what are called
elements are composed of molecular groupings of some fundamental
element, which by proper physical methods might be decomposed, as one
can now decompose a molecule of ammonia or sulphuric acid, or that the
elements are now being created by some extra-physical process in those
far-off regions. In either case an atom is the embodiment of energy in
such a form as to be permanent under ordinary physical circumstances,
but of which, if in any manner it should be destroyed, only the form
would be lost. The ether would remain, and the energy which was embodied
would be distributed in other ways.

The distinction between energy in matter and energy in the ether will be
apparent, on considering that both the ether and energy in some form
must be conceived as existing independent of matter; though every atom
were annihilated, the ether would remain and all the energy embodied in
the atoms would be still in existence in the ether. The atomic energy
would simply be dissolved. One can easily conceive the ether as the same
space-filling, continuous, unlimited medium, without an atom in it. On
this assumption it is clear that no form of energy with which we have to
deal in physical science would have any existence in the ether; for
every one of those forms, gravitational, thermal, electric, magnetic, or
any other--all are the results of the forms of energy in matter. If
there were no atoms, there would be no gravitation, for that is the
attraction of atoms upon each other. If there were no atoms, there could
be no atomic vibration, therefore no heat, and so on for each and all.
Nevertheless, if an atom be the embodiment of energy, there must have
been energy in the ether before any atom existed. One of the properties
of the ether is its ability to distribute energy in certain ways, but
there is no evidence that of itself it ever transforms energy. Once a
given kind of energy is in it, it does not change; hence for the
apparition of a form of energy, like the first vortex-ring, there must
have been not only energy, but some other agency capable of transforming
that energy into a permanent structure. To the best of our knowledge
to-day, the ether would be absolutely helpless. Such energy as was
active in forming atoms must be called by another name than what is
appropriate for such transformations as occur when, for instance, the
mechanical energy of a bullet is transformed into heat when the target
is struck. Behind the ether must be assumed some agency, directing and
controlling energy in a manner totally different from any agency, which
is operative in what we call physical science. Nothing short of what is
called a miracle will do--an event without a physical antecedent in any
way necessarily related to its factors, as is the fact of a stone
related to gravity or heat to an electric current.

Ether energy is an endowment instead of being an embodiment, and implies
antecedents of a super-physical kind.

As each different kind of energy represents some specific form of
motion, and vice versa, some sort of mechanism is needful for
transforming one kind into another, therefore molecular structure of
one kind or another is essential. The transformation is a mechanical
process, and matter in some particular and appropriate form is the
condition of its taking place. If heat appears, then its antecedent has
been some other form of motion acting upon the substance heated. It may
have been the mechanical motion of another mass of matter, as when a
bullet strikes a target and becomes heated; or it may be friction, as
when a car-axle heats when run without proper oiling to reduce friction;
or it may be condensation, as when tinder is ignited by condensing the
air about it; or chemical reactions, when molecular structure is changed
as in combustion, or an electrical current, which implies a dynamo and
steam-engine or water-power. If light appears, its antecedent has been
impact or friction, condensation or chemical action, and if electricity
appears the same sort of antecedents are present. Whether the one or the
other of these forms of energy is developed, depends upon what kind of a
structure the antecedent energy has acted upon. If radiant energy,
so-called, falls upon a mass of matter, what is absorbed is at once
transformed into heat or into electric or magnetic effects; _which_ one
of these depends upon the character of the mechanism upon which the
radiant energy acts, but the radiant energy itself, which consists of
ether-waves, is traceable back in every case to a mass of matter having
definite characteristic motions.

One may therefore say with certainty that every physical phenomenon is a
change in the direction, or velocity, or character, of the energy
present, and such change has been produced by matter acting as a
transformer.

It has already been said that the absence of friction in the ether
enables light-waves to maintain their identity for an indefinite time,
and to an indefinitely great distance. In a uniform, homogeneous
substance of any kind, any kind of energy which might be in it would
continue in it without any change. Uniformity and homogeneity imply
similarity throughout, and the necessary condition for transformation is
unlikeness. One might not look for any kind of physical phenomenon which
was not due to the presence and activity of some heterogeneity.

As a ray of light continues a ray of light so long as it exists in free
ether, so all kinds of radiations, of whatever wave-length, continue
identical until they fall upon some mechanical structure called matter.
Translatory motion continues translatory, rotary continues rotary, and
vibratory continues to be vibratory, and no transforming change can
take place in the absence of matter. The ether is helpless.

It is commonly stated that certain substances, like putty and dough, are
inelastic, while some other substances, like glass, steel, and wood, are
elastic. This quality of elasticity, as manifested in such different
degrees, depends upon molecular combinations; some of which, as in glass
and steel, are favourable for exhibiting it, while others mask it, for
the ultimate atoms of all kinds are certainly highly elastic.

The measure of elasticity in a mass of matter is the velocity with which
a wave-motion will be transmitted through it. Thus the elasticity of the
air determines the velocity of sound in it. If the air be heated, the
elasticity is increased and the sound moves faster. The rates of such
sound-conduction range from a few feet in a second to about 16,000, five
times swifter than a cannon ball. In such elastic bodies as vibrate to
and fro like the prongs of a tuning-fork, or give sounds of a definite
pitch, the rate of vibration is determined by the size and shape of the
body as well as by their elementary composition. The smaller a body is,
the higher its vibratory rate, if it be made of the same material and
the form remains the same. Thus a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket, may vibrate 500 times a second. If it were only
the fifty-millionth of an inch in size, but of the same material and
form, it would vibrate 30,000,000000 times a second; and if it were made
of ether, instead of steel, it would vibrate as many times faster as the
velocity of waves in the ether is greater than it is in steel, and would
be as many as 400,000000,000000 times per second. The amount of
displacement, or the amplitude of vibration, with the pocket-fork might
be no more than the hundredth of an inch, and this rate measured as
translation velocity would be but five inches per second. If the fork
were of atomic magnitude, and should swing its sides one half the
diameter of the atom, or say the hundred-millionth of an inch, the
translational velocity would be equivalent to about eighty miles a
second, or a hundred and fifty times the velocity of a cannon ball,
which may be reckoned at about 3000 feet. When dealing with hoar-frost, which is just frozen dew, we shall find
visible evidence of the rising of dew from the ground.

The sun's heat on the previous day warmed the earth. This heat the earth
retained till evening. As the air chilled, the water-vapour from the
warmer earth rose from its surface, and was arrested by the cold surface
of the leaves. So cold was that surface that it froze the water-vapour
when rising from the earth, and formed hoar-frost in very large
quantities. When this happens later on in the season, one may be almost
sure of having rain in the forenoon.

The day I used the instrument we counted 4,000,000 of dust-particles in a
cubic inch of the air outside of the room, due to the quantity of smoke
from the passing trains. Dr. Aitken has counted in 1 cubic inch of air
immediately above a Bunsen flame the fabulous number of 489,000,000 of
dust-particles.

A small instrument has been constructed which can bring about results
sufficiently accurate for ordinary purposes. It is so constructed that,
when the different parts are unscrewed, they fit into a case 4-1/2 inches
by 2-1/2 by 1-1/4 deep--about the size of an ordinary cigar-case.

After knowing this, we are apt to wonder why our lungs do not get clogged
up with the enormous number of dust-particles. In ordinary breathing, 30
cubic inches of air pass in and out at every breath, and adults breathe
about fifteen times every minute. But the warm lung-surface repels the
colder dust-particles, and the continuous evaporation of moisture from the
surface of the air-tubes prevents the dust from alighting or clinging to
the surface at all.

Dr. Aitken has devoted a vast amount of attention to the enumeration of
dust-particles in the air, on the Continent as well as in Scotland, to
determine the effects of their variation in number.

On his first visit to Hy res, in 1890, he counted with the instrument
12,000 dust-particles in a cubic inch of the air: whereas in the following
year he counted 250,000. He observed, however, that where there was least
dust, the air was very clear; whereas with the maximum of dust, there was
a very thick haze.

At Mentone, the corresponding number was 13,000, when the wind was blowing
from the mountains; but increased to 430,000, when the wind was blowing
from the populous town.

On his first visit to the Rigi Kulm, in Switzerland, the air was
remarkably clear and brilliant, and the corresponding number never
exceeded 33,000; but, on his second visit, he counted no less than
166,000. This was accounted for by a thick haze, which rendered the lower
Alps scarcely visible. The upper limit of the haze was well defined; and
though the sky was cloudless, the sun looked like a harvest moon, and
required no eagle's eye to keep fixed on it.

Next day there was a violent thunder-storm. At 6 P.M. the storm commenced,
and 60,000 dust-particles to the cubic inch of air were registered; but in
the middle of the storm he counted only 13,000. There was a heavy fall of
hail at this time, and he accounts for the diminution of dust-particles by
the down-rush of purer upper air, which displaced the contaminated lower
air.

At the Lake of Lucerne there was an exceptional diminution of the number
in the course of an hour, viz. from 171,000 to 28,000 in a cubic inch. On
looking about, he found that the direction of the wind had changed,
bringing down the purer upper air to the place of observation. The bending
downwards of the trees by the strong wind showed that it was coming from
the upper air.

Returning to Scotland, he continued his observations at Ben Nevis and at
Kingairloch, opposite Appin, Mr. Rankin using the instrument at the top of
the mountain. These observations showed in general that on the mountain
southerly, south-easterly, and easterly winds were more impregnated with
dust-particles, sometimes containing 133,000 per cubic inch. Northerly
winds brought pure air. The observations at sea-level showed a certain
parallelism to those on the summit of the mountain. With a north-westerly
wind the dust-particles reached the low number of 300 per cubic inch, the
lowest recorded at any low-level station.

The general deductions which he made from his numerous observations during
these two years are that (1) air coming from inhabited districts is always
impure; (2) dust is carried by the wind to enormous distances; (3) dust
rises to the tops of mountains during the day; (4) with much dust there is
much haze; (5) high humidity causes great thickness of the atmosphere, if
accompanied by a great amount of dust, whereas there is no evidence that
humidity alone has any effect in producing thickness; (6) and there is
generally a high amount of dust with high temperature, and a low amount of
dust with low temperature.

Next to the enumeration of the dust-particles in the atmosphere is the
marvellous accuracy of counting the number of particles in a fog. The same
ingenious inventor has constructed a fog-counter for the purpose; and the
number of fog-particles in a cubic inch can be ascertained. This
instrument consists of a glass micrometer divided into squares of a known
size, and a strong microscope for observing the drops on the stage. The
space between the micrometer and the microscope is open, so that the air
passes freely over the stage; and the drops that fall on its surface are
easily seen. These drops are very small; many of them when spread on the
glass are no more than the five-hundredth of an inch in diameter.

In observing these drops, the attention requires to be confined to a
limited area of the stage, as many of the drops rapidly evaporate, some
almost as soon as they touch the glass, whilst the large ones remain a few
seconds.

In one set of Dr. Aitken's observations, in February 1891, the fog was so
thick that objects beyond a hundred yards were quite invisible. The number
of drops falling per second varied greatly from time to time. The greatest
number was 323 drops per square inch in one second. The high number never
lasted for long, and in the intervals the number fell as low as 32, or to
one-tenth.

If we knew the size of these drops, we might be able to calculate the
velocity of their fall, and from that obtain the number in a cubic inch.

Though the particles in a fog are slightly finer, the number is about the
same as in a cloud--that is, generally. As clouds vary in density, the
number of particles varies. Sometimes in a cloud one cannot see farther
than 30 yards; whereas in a few minutes it clears up a little, so that we
can see 100 yards. Of course, the denser the cloud the greater the number
of water-particles falling on the calculating-stage of the instrument.

Very heavy falls of cloud-particles seldom last more than a few seconds,
the average being about 325 on the square inch per second, the maximum
reaching to 1290. This is about four times the number counted in a fog.
Yet the particles are so very small that they evaporate instantly when
they reach a slight increase of temperature.

In our ordinary atmosphere there can be no clouds without dust. A
dust-particle is the nucleus that at a certain humidity becomes the centre
of condensation of the water-vapour so as to form a cloud-particle; and a
collection of these forms a cloud.

This condensation of vapour round a number of dust-particles in visible
form gives rise to a vast variety of cloud-shapes. There are two distinct
ways in which the formation of clouds generally takes place. Either a
layer of air is cooled in a body below the dew-point; or a mass of warm
and moist air rises into a mass which is cold and dry. The first forms a
cloud, called, from being a layer, _stratus_; the second forms a cloud,
called, from its heap appearance, _cumulus_. The first is widely extended
and horizontal, averaging 1800 feet in height; the second is convex or
conical, like the head of a sheaf, increasing upward from a level base,
averaging from 4500 feet to 6000 feet in height.

There are endless combinations of these two; but at the height of 27,000
feet, where the cloud-particles are frozen, the structure of the cloud is
finer, like mares' tails, receiving the name _cirrus_. When the cirrus
and cumulus are combined, in well-defined roundish masses, what is
familiarly described as a mackerel sky is beautifully presented. The
dark mass of cloud, called _nimbus_, is the threatening rain-cloud, about
4500 feet in height.

The process of decay in clouds takes place in various ways. A careful
observer may witness the gradual wasting away and dilution into thin air
of even great stretches of cloud, when circumstances are favourable. In
May 1896 my attention was particularly drawn to this at my manse in
Strathmore. In the middle of that exceptionally sultry month, I was
arrested by a remarkable transformation scene. It was the hottest May for
seventy-two years, and the driest for twenty-five years. The whole parched
earth was thirsting for rain. All the morning my eyes were turned to the
clouds in the hope that the much-desired shower should fall. Till ten
o'clock the sun was not seen, and there was no blue in the sky. Nor was
there any haze or fog.

But suddenly the sun shone through a thinner portion of the enveloping
clouds, and, to the north, the sky began to open. As if by some magic
spell there was, in a quarter of an hour, more blue to be seen than
clouds. At the same time, near the horizon, a haze was forming, gradually
becoming denser as time wore on. In an hour the whole clouds were gone,
and the glorious orb of day dispelled the moisture to its thin-air form.

The dust from the air has first to be collected. This is done by placing a
glass plate vertically, and in close contact with one of the panes of
glass in the window, by means of a little india-rubber solution. The plate
being thus rendered colder than the air in the room, the dust is deposited
on it.

Construct a rectangular box, with a square bottom, 1-1/2 inches a side and
3/4 inch deep, and open at the top. Cover the top edge of the box with a
thickness of india-rubber. Place the dusty plate--a square glass mirror, 4
inches a side--on the top of the india-rubber, and hold it down by spring
catches, so as to make the box water-tight. The box has been provided with
two pipes, one for taking in water and the other for taking away the
overflow, with the bulb of a thermometer in the centre. Clean the dust
carefully off one half of the mirror, so that one half of the glass
covering the box is clean and the other half dusty. Pour cold water
through the pipe into the box, so as to lower the temperature of the
mirror, and carefully observe when condensation begins on the clean part
and on the dusty part, taking a note of the difference of temperature. The
condensation of the water-vapour will appear on the dust-particles before
coming down to the natural dew-point temperature of the clean glass. And
the difference between the two temperatures indicates the temperature
above the dew-point at which the dust has condensed the water-vapour.

Magnesia dust has small affinity for water-vapour; accordingly, it
condenses at almost exactly the same temperature as the glass. But
gunpowder has great condensing power. All have noticed that the smoke
from exploded gunpowder is far more dense in damp than in dry weather. In
the experiment it will be found that the dust from gunpowder smoke begins
to show signs of condensing the vapour at a temperature of 9  Fahr. above
the dew-point. In the case of sodium dust, the vapour is condensed from
the air at a temperature of 30  above the dew-point.

Dust collected in a smoking-room shows a decidedly greater condensing
power than that from the outer air.

We can now understand why the glass in picture frames and other places
sometimes appears damp when the air is not saturated. When in winter the
windows are not often cleaned, a damp deposit may be frequently seen on
the glass. Any one can try the experiment. Clean one half of a dusty pane
of glass in cold weather, and the clean part will remain undewed and
clear, while the dusty part is damp to the eye and greasy to the touch.

These observations indicate that moisture is deposited on the
dust-particles from air, which is not saturated, and that the condensation
takes place while the air is comparatively dry, _before_ the temperature
is lowered to the dew-point. There is, then, no definite demarcation
between what seems to us clear air and thick haze. The clearest air has
some haze, and, as the humidity increases, the thickness of the air
increases.

In all haze the temperature is above the dew-point. The dust-particles
have only condensed a very small amount of the moisture so as to form
haze, before the fuller condensation takes place at the dew-point.

At the Italian lakes, on many occasions when the air is damp and still,
every stage of condensation may be observed in close proximity, not
separated by a hard and fast line, but when no one could determine where
the clear air ended and the cloud began. Sometimes in the sky overhead a
gradual change can be observed from perfect clearness to thick air, and
then the cloud.

A thick haze may be occasioned by an increased number of dust-particles
with little moisture, or of a diminished number of dust-particles with
much moisture, above the point of saturation. The haze is cleared by this
temperature rising, so as to allow the moisture to evaporate from the
dust-particles.

Whenever the air is dry and hazy, much dust is found in it; as the dust
decreases the haze also decreases. For example, Dr. Aitken, at
Kingairloch, in one of the clearest districts of Argyleshire, on a clear
July afternoon, counted 4000 dust-particles in a cubic inch of the air;
whereas, two days before, in thick haze, he counted no fewer than 64,000
in the cubic inch. At Dumfries the number counted on a very hazy day in
October increased twenty-fold over the number counted the day before, when
it was clear.

All know that thick haze is usual in very sultry weather. The wavy,
will-o'-the-wisp ripples near the horizon indicate its presence very
plainly. During the intense heat there is generally much dust in the
atmosphere; this dust, by the high temperature, attracts moisture from the
apparently dry air, though above the saturation point. In all
circumstances, then, the haze can be accounted for by the condensing power
of the dust-particles in the atmosphere, at a higher temperature than that
required for the formation of fogs, or mists, or rain.

The transparency of the atmosphere is very much destroyed by the
impurities communicated to it while passing over the inhabited areas of
the country. Dr. Aitken devoted eighteen months to compare the amount of
dusty impurities in different masses of air, or of different airs brought
in by winds from different directions.

He took Falkirk for his centre of observations. This town lies a little to
the north of a line drawn between Edinburgh and Glasgow, and is nearly
midway between them. If we draw a line due west from it, and another due
north, we find that, in the north-west quadrant so enclosed, the
population of that part of Scotland is extremely thin, the country over
that area being chiefly mountainous. In all other directions, the
conditions are quite different. In the north-east quadrant are the fairly
well-populated areas of Aberdeenshire, Forfarshire, and the thickly
populated county of Fife. In the south-east quadrant are situated
Edinburgh and the well-populated districts of the south-east of Scotland.
And in the south-west quadrant are Glasgow and the large manufacturing
towns which surround it. The winds from three of these quadrants bring air
polluted in its passage over populated areas, whereas the winds from the
north-west come comparatively pure.

The general plan of estimating the amount of haze is to note the most
distant hill that can be seen through the haze. The distance in miles of
the farthest away hill visible is then called the limit of visibility of
the air at the time. For the observations made at Falkirk, only three
hills are available, one about four miles distant, the Ochils about
fifteen miles distant, and Ben Ledi about twenty-five miles distant--all
in the north-west quadrant. When the air is thick, only the near hill can
be seen; then the Ochils become visible as the air clears; and at last Ben
Ledi is seen, when the haze becomes still less. After Ben Ledi is visible,
it then becomes necessary to estimate the amount of haze on it, in order
to get the limit of visibility of the air at the time. Thus, if Ben Ledi
be half-hazed, then the limit of visibility will be fifty miles. In this
way all the estimates of haze have been reduced to one scale for
comparison.

As the result of all the observations it was found that, as the dryness of
the air increases, the limit of visibility also increases. A very marked
difference in the transparency of the air was found with winds from the
different directions. In the north-west quadrant the winds made the air
very clear, whereas winds from all other directions made the air very much
hazed. The winds in the other three areas are nearly ten times more hazed
than those from the north-west quadrant. That is very striking.

The conclusion come to is that the air from densely inhabited districts is
so polluted that it is fully nine times more hazed than the air that comes
from the thinly inhabited districts; in other words, the atmosphere at
Falkirk is about ten times thicker when the wind is east or south than it
would be if there were no fires and no inhabitants.

It is interesting to notice that the limit varies considerably for the
same wind at the same humidity. This is what might have been expected,
because from the observations made by the dust-counter the number of
particles varied greatly in winds from the same directions, but at
different times. This depends upon the rise and fall of the wind, changes
in the state of trade, season of the year, and other causes. During a
strike, the dearth of coal will make a considerable diminution in the
number of dust-particles in the air of large towns. With a north wind, the
extreme limits of visibility are 120 to 200 miles; and with a north-west
wind, from 70 to 250 miles. An east wind has as limits 4 to 50 miles, and
a south-east wind 2 to 60 miles.

One interesting fact to be noticed, after wading through these tables, is
this--that, as a general result, the transparency of the air increases
about 3 7 times for any increase in dryness from 2  to 8  of wet-bulb
depression. That is, the clearness of the air is inversely proportional to
the relative humidity; or, put another way, if the air is four times drier
it is about four times clearer.

The phrase thunder clears the air is familiar to all. It contains a very
vital truth, yet even scientific men did not know its full meaning until
just the other day. It came by experience to people who had been for ages
observing the weather; and it is one of the most pointed of the
"weather-lore" expressions. Folks got to know, by a sort of rule-of-thumb,
truths which scientifically they were unable to learn. And this is one.

Perhaps, therefore, we should respect a little more what is called
"folk-lore," or ordinary people's sayings. Experience has taught men many
wonderful things. In olden times they were keener natural observers. They
had few books, but they had plenty of time. They studied the habits of
animals and moods of nature, and they came wonderfully near to reaching
the full truth, though they could not give a reason for it. The
awe-inspiring in nature has especially riveted the attention of man.

No less than thirty colonies of organisms were counted in a cubic foot of
air taken from the Golden Gallery of St. Paul's Cathedral, London, and 140
from the air of the churchyard. An ordinary man would breathe there
thirty-six micro-organisms every minute.

Electricity has a powerful effect in destroying these organisms. Ozone is
generated in the air by lightning, and it is detrimental to them. In fine
ozoned Highland air scarcely a disease-germ can be detected. Open sea air
contains about one germ in two cubic feet. It has been found that in Paris
the average in summer is about 140 per cubic foot of air, but in bedrooms
the number is double. During the twenty-four hours of the day the number
of germs is highest about 6 A.M., and lowest about mid-day.

Raindrops carry the germs to the ground. Hence the advantage of a thunder
plout in a sanitary way. A cubic foot of rain has been found to contain
5500 organic dust-germs, besides 7,000,000,000 of inorganic
dust-particles. In a dirty town the rain will bring down in a year, upon a
square foot of surface, no less than 3,000,000 of bacteria, many of them
being disease-bearing and death-bearing. No wonder, then, that scientific
men are using every endeavour to protect the human frame, as well as the
frame of the lower animals, from the baneful inroads of these floating
nuclei of disease and death.

For weakness of body and fatigue of mind a very common and essentially
serviceable recommendation is a change of air. Of course, the change of
scene from coast to country, or from town to hillside, may help much the
depressed in body or mind; and this is very commendable. But, strange to
say, there is a healing virtue in breathing different air.

At first one is apt to think that air is the same all over, as he thinks
water is--especially outside smoky towns; but both have varied qualities
in different parts. You have only to be assured that in a cubic inch of
bedroom air in the denser parts of a large town there are about 20,000,000
of dust-particles, and in the open air of a heathery mountain-side there
are only some hundreds, to see that there is something after all on the
face of it in the old wives' saw.

Not that the dust-particles are all injurious; for most of them are
inorganic, and many of the organic particles are quite wholesome; yet
there is a change wrought, often very marked, in going from one place to
another for different air.

Even in the country, especially in summer-time, one distinctly notices the
great difference in the air of lowland and highland localities. The ten
miles change from Strathmore to Glenisla shows a marked difference in the
air. Below, it is close, weakening, enervating; above, it is exhilarating,
invigorating, and strong.

So people must have a change--at least those who can afford it--for health
must be seen to first of all, if one has means to do so. Oh! the blessing
of good health! How many who enjoy it never think of the misery of its
loss! In fact, health is the soul that animates all enjoyments of life;
for without it those would soon be tasteless. A man starves at the
best-spread table, and is poor in the midst of the greatest treasures
without health.

Sportsmen are livingly aware of the recuperative power of the Highland
air. Perhaps these city men do not benefit so much by the easy walking
exercise on the grouse moors as in breathing the splendidly
delight-inspiring air. What a change one feels there in a very few hours!

After the sun's broad beams have tired the sight, the moon with more sober
light charms us to descry her beauty, as she shines sublimely in her
virgin modesty. There is always a most fascinating freshness in the first
sight of the new moon. The superstition of centuries adds to this charm.
Why boys and girls like to turn over a coin in their pocket at this sight
one cannot tell: yet it is done. No young lady likes to look at the new
moon through a pane of glass. And farmers are always confident of a change
of weather with a new moon: at least in bad weather they earnestly hope
for it.

Accordingly, I concluded that there must be clouds to the west, though I
could not see them, which reflected rays of light and faintly illuminated
the shadowed part of the moon. It had become much colder, and I concluded
that during the night the cloud-particles, if driven near by the wind,
would condense into rain. And, assuredly, next morning I was gratified to
find that rain had fallen in large quantities, substantiating the theory.

Gradually the eastern glow rose and reddened all the clouds, but the front
clouds were still grey. The effect was very fine in contrast. The fleecy
clouds overhead became transparently light red, as they stretched over to
reach the silver-streaked west. The new moon was just appearing upright
against a slightly less bright opening in the sky, betokening the firm
hardness of autumn.

Soon the colouring melted away, and the peaceful reign of the later
twilight possessed the land.

Now why that brilliancy of the east, when the west was colourless? Most of
all you note the immense variety and wealth of reds. These are due to dust
in the atmosphere. We are the more convinced of this by the very
remarkable and beautiful sunsets which occurred after the tremendous
eruption at Krakatoa, in the Straits of Sunda, thirty years ago. There was
then ejected an enormous quantity of fine dust, which spread over the
whole world's atmosphere. So long as that vast amount of dust remained in
the air did the sunsets and afterglows display an exceptional wealth of
colouring. All observers were struck with the vividly brilliant red
colours in all shades and tints.

The minute particles of dust in the atmosphere arrest the sun's rays and
scatter them in all directions; they are so small, however, that they
cannot reflect and scatter all; their power is limited to the scattering
of the rays at the blue end of the spectrum, while the red rays pass on
unarrested. The display of the colours of the blue end are found in
numberless shades, from the full deep blue in the zenith to the
greenish-blue near the horizon.

If there were no fine dust-particles in the upper strata, the sunset
effect would be whiter; if there were no large dust-particles, there would
be no colouring at all. If there were no dust-particles in the air at all,
the light would simply pass through into space without revealing itself,
and the moment the sun disappeared there would be total darkness. The very
existence of our twilight depends on the dust in the air; and its length
depends on the amount and extension upwards of the dust-particles.

But how have the particles been increased in size in the east? Because, as
the sun was sinking, but before its rays failed to illumine the heavens,
the temperature of the air began to fall. This cooling made the
dust-particles seize the water-vapour to form haze-particles of a larger
size. The particles in the east first lose the sun's heat, and first
become cool; and the rays of light are then best sifted, producing a more
distinct and darker red. As the sun dipped lower, the particles overhead
became a turn larger, and thereby better reflected the red rays.
Accordingly, the roseate bands in the east spread over to the zenith, and
passed over to the west, producing in a few minutes a universal
transformation glow.

To produce the full effect often witnessed, there must be, besides the
ordinary dust-particles, small crystals floating in the air, which
increase the reflection from their surfaces and enhance the glow effects.
In autumn, after sunset, the water-covered dust-particles become frozen
and the red light streams with rare brilliancy, causing all reddish and
coloured objects to glow with a rare brightness. Then the air glows with a
strange light as of the northern dawn. From all this it is clear that,
though the colouring of sunset is produced by the direct rays of the sun,
the afterglow is produced by reflection, or, rather, radiation from the
illuminated particles near the horizon.

The effect in autumn is a stream of red light, of varied tones, and rare
brilliancy in all quarters, unseen during the warmer summer. We have to
witness the sunsets at Ballachulish to be assured that Waller Paton really
imitated nature in the characteristic bronze tints of his richly painted
landscapes.

Little attention has been paid to foreglows compared with afterglows,
either with regard to their natural beauty or their weather forecasting.
But either the ordinary red-cloud surroundings at sunrise, or the western
foreglow at rarer intervals, betokens to the weather-prophet wet and
gloomy weather. The farmer and the sailor do not like the sight, they
depend so much on favourable weather conditions.

Of course, sunrise to the  sthetic observer has always its charms. The
powerful king of day rejoices as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber
as he steps upon the earth over the dewy mountain tops, bathing all in
light, and spreading gladness and deep joy before him. The lessening
cloud, the kindling azure, and the mountain's brow illumined with golden
streaks, mark his approach; he is encompassed with bright beams, as he
throws his unutterable love upon the clouds, the beauteous robes of
heaven. Aslant the dew-bright earth and coloured air he looks in
boundless majesty abroad, touching the green leaves all a-tremble with
gold light.

But glorious, and educating, and inspiring as is the sunrise in itself in
many cases, there is occasionally something very remarkable that is
connected with it. Rare is it, but how charming when witnessed, though
till very recently it was all but unexplained. This is the _foreglow_.

It is in no respect so splendid as the afterglow succeeding sunset; but,
because of its comparative rarity, its beauty is enhanced. I remember a
foreglow most vividly which was seen at my manse, in Strathmore, in
January 1893. My bedroom window looked due west; I slept with the blind
up. On that morning I was struck, just after the darkness was fading away,
with a slight colouring all along the western horizon. The skeleton
branches of the trees stood out strongly against it. The colouring
gradually increased, and the roseate hue stretched higher. The old
well-known faces that I used to conjure up out of the thin blended boughs
became more life-like, as the cheeks flushed. There was rare warmth on a
winter morning to cheer a half-despairing soul, tired out with the long
hours of oil reading, and pierced to the heart by the never-ceasing
rimes; yet I could not understand it.

He was taking his walk on the high ground south of Falkirk. In the east he
observed a strange pillar-like cloud, lit up with the light of the setting
sun. Then the red pillar extended, curved over, and formed a perfect arch
across the north-eastern sky. When fully developed, this rainbow was the
most extraordinary one which he had ever seen. There was no colour in it
but red. It consisted simply of a red arch, and even the red had a
sameness about it.

Outside the rainbow there was part of a secondary bow. The Ochil Hills
were north of his point of observation. These hills were covered with
snow, and the setting sun was glowing with rosy light. Never had he seen
such a depth of colour as was on them on this occasion. It was a deep,
furnacy red. The sun's light was shorn of all the rays of short-wave
length on its passage through the atmosphere, and only the red rays
reached the earth. The reason why the Ochils glowed with so deep a red
was owing to their being overhung by a dense curtain of clouds, which
screened off the light of the sky. The illumination was thus principally
that of the direct softer light of the sun.

He must be a very careless observer who has not been struck with the
appearance of the streamers which occasionally light up the northern
heavens, and which farmers consider to be indicators of strong wind or
broken weather.

Though no fixed conclusions are yet established about the causes of the
brilliant auroral display, yet, as the results of laborious observations,
we are assured that the stabler centre of our solar system holds in its
powerful sway the several planets at their respective distances, supplying
them all with their seasonable light and heat, vibrating sympathetic
chords in all, and even controlling under certain--though to us still
unknown--laws the electric streamers that flit, apparently lawlessly, in
the distant earth's atmosphere.

At the same time, the dust-particles suspended in the water have a great
effect in making the water appear more beautiful, brilliant, and varied in
its colouring; because little or no light is reflected by the interior of
a mass of water itself. If a dark metal vessel be filled with a weak
solution of Prussian blue, the liquid will appear quite dark and void of
colour. But throw in some fine white powder, and the liquid will at once
become of a brilliant blue colour. This accounts for the change of depth
and brilliancy of colour in the several shores of the Mediterranean.

The wide range of the indications of the instrument, from pure clearness
to nearly black blue, makes the estimate of the impurity very easily taken
with it; and, as there are few parts to get out of order, it is hoped it
may come into general use for sanitary work. 
We have often heard it said that thoughts are things, and there are many
among us who are persuaded of the truth of this statement. Yet very few
of us have any clear idea as to what kind of thing a thought is, and the
object of this little book is to help us to conceive this.

There are some serious difficulties in our way, for our conception of
space is limited to three dimensions, and when we attempt to make a
drawing we practically limit ourselves to two. In reality the
presentation even of ordinary three-dimensional objects is seriously
defective, for scarcely a line or angle in our drawing is accurately
shown. If a road crosses the picture, the part in the foreground must be
represented as enormously wider than that in the background, although in
reality the width is unchanged. If a house is to be drawn, the right
angles at its corners must be shown as acute or obtuse as the case may
be, but hardly ever as they actually are. In fact, we draw everything
not as it is but as it appears, and the effort of the artist is by a
skilful arrangement of lines upon a flat surface to convey to the eye an
impression which shall recall that made by a three-dimensional object.

It is possible to do this only because similar objects are already
familiar to those who look at the picture and accept the suggestion
which it conveys. A person who had never seen a tree could form but
little idea of one from even the most skilful painting. If to this
difficulty we add the other and far more serious one of a limitation of
consciousness, and suppose ourselves to be showing the picture to a
being who knew only two dimensions, we see how utterly impossible it
would be to convey to him any adequate impression of such a landscape as
we see. Precisely this difficulty in its most aggravated form stands in
our way, when we try to make a drawing of even a very simple
thought-form. The vast majority of those who look at the picture are
absolutely limited to the consciousness of three dimensions, and
furthermore, have not the slightest conception of that inner world to
which thought-forms belong, with all its splendid light and colour. All
that we can do at the best is to represent a section of the
thought-form; and those whose faculties enable them to see the original
cannot but be disappointed with any reproduction of it. Still, those who
are at present unable to see anything will gain at least a partial
comprehension, and however inadequate it may be it is at least better
than nothing.

All students know that what is called the aura of man is the outer part
of the cloud-like substance of his higher bodies, interpenetrating each
other, and extending beyond the confines of his physical body, the
smallest of all. They know also that two of these bodies, the mental and
desire bodies, are those chiefly concerned with the appearance of what
are called thought-forms. But in order that the matter may be made clear
for all, and not only for students already acquainted with theosophical
teachings, a recapitulation of the main facts will not be out of place.

When the man's energy flows outwards towards external objects of desire,
or is occupied in passional and emotional activities, this energy works
in a less subtle order of matter than the mental, in that of the astral
world. What is called his desire-body is composed of this matter, and it
forms the most prominent part of the aura in the undeveloped man. Where
the man is of a gross type, the desire-body is of the denser matter of
the astral plane, and is dull in hue, browns and dirty greens and reds
playing a great part in it. Through this will flash various
characteristic colours, as his passions are excited. A man of a higher
type has his desire-body composed of the finer qualities of astral
matter, with the colours, rippling over and flashing through it, fine
and clear in hue. While less delicate and less radiant than the mental
body, it forms a beautiful object, and as selfishness is eliminated all
the duller and heavier shades disappear.

This desire (or astral) body gives rise to a second class of entities,
similar in their general constitution to the thought-forms already
described, but limited to the astral plane, and generated by the mind
under the dominion of the animal nature.

These are caused by the activity of the lower mind, throwing itself out
through the astral body--the activity of Kma-Manas in theosophical
terminology, or the mind dominated by desire. Vibrations in the body of
desire, or astral body, are in this case set up, and under these this
body throws off a vibrating portion of itself, shaped, as in the
previous case, by the nature of the vibrations, and this attracts to
itself some of the appropriate elemental essence of the astral world.
Such a thought-form has for its body this elemental essence, and for its
animating soul the desire or passion which threw it forth; according to
the amount of mental energy combined with this desire or passion will
be the force of the thought-form. These, like those belonging to the
mental plane, are called artificial elementals, and they are by far the
most common, as few thoughts of ordinary men and women are untinged with
desire, passion, or emotion.

Each definite thought produces a double effect--a radiating vibration
and a floating form. The thought itself appears first to clairvoyant
sight as a vibration in the mental body, and this may be either simple
or complex. If the thought itself is absolutely simple, there is only
the one rate of vibration, and only one type of mental matter will be
strongly affected. The mental body is composed of matter of several
degrees of density, which we commonly arrange in classes according to
the sub-planes. Of each of these we have many sub-divisions, and if we
typify these by drawing horizontal lines to indicate the different
degrees of density, there is another arrangement which we might
symbolise by drawing perpendicular lines at right angles to the others,
to denote types which differ in quality as well as in density. There are
thus many varieties of this mental matter, and it is found that each one
of these has its own especial and appropriate rate of vibration, to
which it seems most accustomed, so that it very readily responds to it,
and tends to return to it as soon as possible when it has been forced
away from it by some strong rush of thought or feeling. When a sudden
wave of some emotion sweeps over a man, for example, his astral body is
thrown into violent agitation, and its original colours are or the time
almost obscured by the flush of carmine, of blue, or of scarlet which
corresponds with the rate of vibration of that particular emotion. This
change is only temporary; it passes off in a few seconds, and the astral
body rapidly resumes its usual condition. Yet every such rush of feeling
produces a permanent effect: it always adds a little of its hue to the
normal colouring of the astral body, so that every time that the man
yields himself to a certain emotion it becomes easier for him to yield
himself to it again, because his astral body is getting into the habit
of vibrating at that especial rate.

The majority of human thoughts, however, are by no means simple.
Absolutely pure affection of course exists; but we very often find it
tinged with pride or with selfishness, with jealousy or with animal
passion. This means that at least two separate vibrations appear both in
the mental and astral bodies--frequently more than two. The radiating
vibration, therefore, will be a complex one, and the resultant
thought-form will show several colours instead of only one.

These radiating vibrations, like all others in nature, become less
powerful in proportion to the distance from their source, though it is
probable that the variation is in proportion to the cube of the distance
instead of to the square, because of the additional dimension involved.
Again, like all other vibrations, these tend to reproduce themselves
whenever opportunity is offered to them; and so whenever they strike
upon another mental body they tend to provoke in it their own rate of
motion. That is--from the point of view of the man whose mental body is
touched by these waves--they tend to produce in his mind thoughts of the
same type as that which had previously arisen in the mind of the thinker
who sent forth the waves. The distance to which such thought-waves
penetrate, and the force and persistency with which they impinge upon
the mental bodies of others, depend upon the strength and clearness of
the original thought. In this way the thinker is in the same position as
the speaker. The voice of the latter sets in motion waves of sound in
the air which radiate from him in all directions, and convey his message
to all those who are within hearing, and the distance to which his voice
can penetrate depends upon its power and upon the clearness of his
enunciation. In just the same way the forceful thought will carry very
much further than the weak and undecided thought; but clearness and
definiteness are of even greater importance than strength. Again, just
as the speaker's voice may fall upon heedless ears where men are already
engaged in business or in pleasure, so may a mighty wave of thought
sweep past without affecting the mind of the man, if he be already
deeply engrossed in some other line of thought.

It should be understood that this radiating vibration conveys the
character of the thought, but not its subject. They naturally act with special vigour upon
those minds already habituated to vibrations of similar character; yet
they have some effect on every mental body upon which they impinge, so
that their tendency is to awaken the power of higher thought in those to
whom it has not yet become a custom. It is thus evident that every man
who thinks along high lines is doing missionary work, even though he may
be entirely unconscious of it.

Let us turn now to the second effect of thought, the creation of a
definite form. All students of the occult are acquainted with the idea
of the elemental essence, that strange half-intelligent life which
surrounds us in all directions, vivifying the matter of the mental and
astral planes. This matter thus animated responds very readily to the
influence of human thought, and every impulse sent out, either from the
mental body or from the astral body of man, immediately clothes itself
in a temporary vehicle of this vitalised matter. Such a thought or
impulse becomes for the time a kind of living creature, the
thought-force being the soul, and the vivified matter the body. Instead
of using the somewhat clumsy paraphrase, astral or mental matter
ensouled by the monadic essence at the stage of one of the elemental
kingdoms, theosophical writers often, for brevity's sake, call this
quickened matter simply elemental essence; and sometimes they speak of
the thought-form as an elemental. There may be infinite variety in the
colour and shape of such elementals or thought-forms, for each thought
draws round it the matter which is appropriate for its expression, and
sets that matter into vibration in harmony with its own; so that the
character of the thought decides its colour, and the study of its
variations and combinations is an exceedingly interesting one.

This thought-form may not inaptly be compared to a Leyden jar, the
coating of living essence being symbolised by the jar, and the thought
energy by the charge of electricity. If the man's thought or feeling is
directly connected with someone else, the resultant thought-form moves
towards that person and discharges itself upon his astral and mental
bodies. If the man's thought is about himself, or is based upon a
personal feeling, as the vast majority of thoughts are, it hovers round
its creator and is always ready to react upon him whenever he is for a
moment in a passive condition. For example, a man who yields himself to
thoughts of impurity may forget all about them while he is engaged in
the daily routine of his business, even though the resultant forms are
hanging round him in a heavy cloud, because his attention is otherwise
directed and his astral body is therefore not impressible by any other
rate of vibration than its own. When, however, the marked vibration
slackens and the man rests after his labours and leaves his mind blank
as regards definite thought, he is very likely to feel the vibration of
impurity stealing insidiously upon him. If the consciousness of the man
be to any extent awakened, he may perceive this and cry out that he is
being tempted by the devil; yet the truth is that the temptation is from
without only in appearance, since it is nothing but the natural reaction
upon him of his own thought-forms. Each man travels through space
enclosed within a cage of his own building, surrounded by a mass of the
forms created by his habitual thoughts. Through this medium he looks out
upon the world, and naturally he sees everything tinged with its
predominant colours, and all rates of vibration which reach him from
without are more or less modified by its rate. Thus until the man learns
complete control of thought and feeling, he sees nothing as it really
is, since all his observations must be made through this medium, which
distorts and colours everything like badly-made glass.

If the thought-form be neither definitely personal nor specially aimed
at someone else, it simply floats detached in the atmosphere, all the
time radiating vibrations similar to those originally sent forth by its
creator. If it does not come into contact with any other mental body,
this radiation gradually exhausts its store of energy, and in that case
the form falls to pieces; but if it succeeds in awakening sympathetic
vibration in any mental body near at hand, an attraction is set up, and
the thought-form is usually absorbed by that mental body. Thus we see
that the influence of the thought-form is by no means so far-reaching as
that of the original vibration; but in so far as it acts, it acts with
much greater precision. What it produces in the mind-body which it
influences is not merely a thought of an order similar to that which
gave it birth; it is actually the same thought. The radiation may affect
thousands and stir up in them thoughts on the same level as the
original, and yet it may happen that no one of them will be identical
with that original; the thought-form can affect only very few, but in
those few cases it will reproduce exactly the initiatory idea.

The fact of the creation by vibrations of a distinct form, geometrical
or other, is already familiar to every student of acoustics, and
"Chladni's" figures are continually reproduced in every physical
laboratory.

The table of colours given in the frontispiece has already been
thoroughly described in the book _Man Visible and Invisible_, and the
meaning to be attached to them is just the same in the thought-form as
in the body out of which it is evolved. For the sake of those who have
not at hand the full description given in the book just mentioned, it
will be well to state that black means hatred and malice. Red, of all
shades from lurid brick-red to brilliant scarlet, indicates anger;
brutal anger will show as flashes of lurid red from dark brown clouds,
while the anger of noble indignation is a vivid scarlet, by no means
unbeautiful, though it gives an unpleasant thrill; a particularly dark
and unpleasant red, almost exactly the colour called dragon's blood,
shows animal passion and sensual desire of various kinds. Clear brown
(almost burnt sienna) shows avarice; hard dull brown-grey is a sign of
selfishness--a colour which is indeed painfully common; deep heavy grey
signifies depression, while a livid pale grey is associated with fear;
grey-green is a signal of deceit, while brownish-green (usually flecked
with points and flashes of scarlet) betokens jealousy. Green seems
always to denote adaptability; in the lowest case, when mingled with
selfishness, this adaptability becomes deceit; at a later stage, when
the colour becomes purer, it means rather the wish to be all things to
all men, even though it may be chiefly for the sake of becoming popular
and bearing a good reputation with them; in its still higher, more
delicate and more luminous aspect, it shows the divine power of
sympathy. Affection expresses itself in all shades of crimson and rose;
a full clear carmine means a strong healthy affection of normal type; if
stained heavily with brown-grey, a selfish and grasping feeling is
indicated, while pure pale rose marks that absolutely unselfish love
which is possible only to high natures; it passes from the dull crimson
of animal love to the most exquisite shades of delicate rose, like the
early flushes of the dawning, as the love becomes purified from all
selfish elements, and flows out in wider and wider circles of generous
impersonal tenderness and compassion to all who are in need. With a
touch of the blue of devotion in it, this may express a strong
realisation of the universal brotherhood of humanity. Deep orange
imports pride or ambition, and the various shades of yellow denote
intellect or intellectual gratification, dull yellow ochre implying the
direction of such faculty to selfish purposes, while clear gamboge shows
a distinctly higher type, and pale luminous primrose yellow is a sign of
the highest and most unselfish use of intellectual power, the pure
reason directed to spiritual ends. The different shades of blue all
indicate religious feeling, and range through all hues from the dark
brown-blue of selfish devotion, or the pallid grey-blue of
fetish-worship tinged with fear, up to the rich deep clear colour of
heartfelt adoration, and the beautiful pale azure of that highest form
which implies self-renunciation and union with the divine; the
devotional thought of an unselfish heart is very lovely in colour, like
the deep blue of a summer sky. Through such clouds of blue will often
shine out golden stars of great brilliancy, darting upwards like a
shower of sparks. A mixture of affection and devotion is manifested by a
tint of violet, and the more delicate shades of this invariably show the
capacity of absorbing and responding to a high and beautiful ideal. The
brilliancy and the depth of the colours are usually a measure of the
strength and the activity of the feeling.

Another consideration which must not be forgotten is the type of matter
in which these forms are generated. If a thought be purely intellectual
and impersonal--for example, if the thinker is attempting to solve a
problem in algebra or geometry--the thought-form and the wave of
vibration will be confined entirely to the mental plane. If, however,
the thought be of a spiritual nature, if it be tinged with love and
aspiration or deep unselfish feeling, it will rise upwards from the
mental plane and will borrow much of the splendour and glory of the
buddhic level. In such a case its influence is exceedingly powerful, and
every such thought is a mighty force for good which cannot but produce a
decided effect upon all mental bodies within reach, if they contain any
quality at all capable of response.

If, on the other hand, the thought has in it something of self or of
personal desire, at once its vibration turns downwards, and it draws
round itself a body of astral matter in addition to its clothing of
mental matter. Such a thought-form is capable of acting upon the astral
bodies of other men as well as their minds, so that it can not only
raise thought within them, but can also stir up their feelings.

That which takes the image of the thinker. When a man thinks of
himself as in some distant place, or wishes earnestly to be in that
place, he makes a thought-form in his own image which appears there.
Such a form has not infrequently been seen by others, and has sometimes
been taken for the astral body or apparition of the man himself. In such
a case, either the seer must have enough of clairvoyance for the time to
be able to observe that astral shape, or the thought-form must have
sufficient strength to materialise itself--that is, to draw round itself
temporarily a certain amount of physical matter. The thought which
generates such a form as this must necessarily be a strong one, and it
therefore employs a larger proportion of the matter of the mental body,
so that though the form is small and compressed when it leaves the
thinker, it draws round it a considerable amount of astral matter, and
usually expands to life-size before it appears at its destination.

That which takes the image of some material object. When a man thinks
of his friend he forms within his mental body a minute image of that
friend, which often passes outward and usually floats suspended in the
air before him. In the same way if he thinks of a room, a house, a
landscape, tiny images of these things are formed within the mental body
and afterwards externalised. This is equally true when he is exercising
his imagination; the painter who forms a conception of his future
picture builds it up out of the matter of his mental body, and then
projects it into space in front of him, keeps it before his mind's eye,
and copies it. The novelist in the same way builds images of his
character in mental matter, and by the exercise of his will moves these
puppets from one position or grouping to another, so that the plot of
his story is literally acted out before him. With our curiously inverted
conceptions of reality it is hard for us to understand that these mental
images actually exist, and are so entirely objective that they may
readily be seen by the clairvoyant, and can even be rearranged by some
one other than their creator. Some novelists have been dimly aware of
such a process, and have testified that their characters when once
created developed a will of their own, and insisted on carrying the plot
of the story along lines quite different from those originally intended
by the author. This has actually happened, sometimes because the
thought-forms were ensouled by playful nature-spirits, or more often
because some 'dead' novelist, watching on the astral plane the
development of the plan of his fellow-author, thought that he could
improve upon it, and chose this method of putting forward his
suggestions.

That which takes a form entirely its own, expressing its inherent
qualities in the matter which it draws round it. Only thought-forms of
this third class can usefully be illustrated, for to represent those of
the first or second class would be merely to draw portraits or
landscapes. In those types we have the plastic mental or astral matter
moulded in imitation of forms belonging to the physical plane; in this
third group we have a glimpse of the forms natural to the astral or
mental planes. Yet this very fact, which makes them so interesting,
places an insuperable barrier in the way of their accurate reproduction.

Thought-forms of this third class almost invariably manifest themselves
upon the astral plane, as the vast majority of them are expressions of
feeling as well as of thought. Those of which we here give specimens are
almost wholly of that class, except that we take a few examples of the
beautiful thought-forms created in definite meditation by those who,
through long practice, have learnt how to think.

Thought-forms directed towards individuals produce definitely marked
effects, these effects being either partially reproduced in the aura of
the recipient and so increasing the total result, or repelled from it. A
thought of love and of desire to protect, directed strongly towards some
beloved object, creates a form which goes to the person thought of, and
remains in his aura as a shielding and protecting agent; it will seek
all opportunities to serve, and all opportunities to defend, not by a
conscious and deliberate action, but by a blind following out of the
impulse impressed upon it, and it will strengthen friendly forces that
impinge on the aura and weaken unfriendly ones. Thus may we create and
maintain veritable guardian angels round those we love, and many a
mother's prayer for a distant child thus circles round him, though she
knows not the method by which her prayer is answered.

In cases in which good or evil thoughts are projected at individuals,
those thoughts, if they are to directly fulfil their mission, must find,
in the aura of the object to whom they are sent, materials capable of
responding sympathetically to their vibrations. Any combination of
matter can only vibrate within certain definite limits, and if the
thought-form be outside all the limits within which the aura is capable
of vibrating, it cannot affect that aura at all. It consequently
rebounds from it, and that with a force proportionate to the energy with
which it impinged upon it. This is why it is said that a pure heart and
mind are the best protectors against any inimical assaults, for such a
pure heart and mind will construct an astral and a mental body of fine
and subtle materials, and these bodies cannot respond to vibrations that
demand coarse and dense matter. If an evil thought, projected with
malefic intent, strikes such a body, it can only rebound from it, and it
is flung back with all its own energy; it then flies backward along the
magnetic line of least resistance, that which it has just traversed, and
strikes its projector; he, having matter in his astral and mental bodies
similar to that of the thought-form he generated, is thrown into
respondent vibrations, and suffers the destructive effects he had
intended to cause to another. Thus curses [and blessings] come home to
roost. From this arise also the very serious effects of hating or
suspecting a good and highly-advanced man; the thought-forms sent
against him cannot injure him, and they rebound against their
projectors, shattering them mentally, morally, or physically. Several
such instances are well known to members of the Theosophical Society,
having come under their direct observation. So long as any of the
coarser kinds of matter connected with evil and selfish thoughts remain
in a person's body, he is open to attack from those who wish him evil,
but when he has perfectly eliminated these by self-purification his
haters cannot injure him, and he goes on calmly and peacefully amid all
the darts of their malice. But it is bad for those who shoot out such
darts.

Another point that should be mentioned before passing to the
consideration of our illustrations is that every one of the
thought-forms here given is drawn from life. They are not imaginary
forms, prepared as some dreamer thinks that they ought to appear; they
are representations of forms actually observed as thrown off by ordinary
men and women, and either reproduced with all possible care and fidelity
by those who have seen them, or with the help of artists to whom the
seers have described them.

A very striking contrast to the humiliating weakness shown in these two
forms is the splendid strength and decision of the third. Here we have
no amorphous mass with quivering lines and explosive fragments, but a
powerful, clear-cut and definite thought, obviously full of force and
resolution. For this is the thought of the officer in charge--the man
responsible for the lives and the safety of the passengers, and he rises
to the emergency in a most satisfactory manner. It does not even occur
to him to feel the least shadow of fear; he has no time for that. Though
the scarlet of the sharp point of his weapon-like thought-form shows
anger that the accident should have happened, the bold curve of orange
immediately above it betokens perfect self-confidence and certainty of
his power to deal with the difficulty. The brilliant yellow implies that
his intellect is already at work upon the problem, while the green which
runs side by side with it denotes the sympathy which he feels for those
whom he intends to save. A very striking and instructive group of
thought-forms.

The upper form represents a state of mind which is perhaps even more
harmful in its effects, for this is the gloating of the successful
gambler over his ill-gotten gain. Here the outline is perfectly
definite, and the man's resolution to persist in his evil course is
unmistakable. The broad band of orange in the centre shows very clearly
that although when the man loses he may curse the inconstancy of fate,
when he wins he attributes his success entirely to his own transcendent
genius. Probably he has invented some system to which he pins his faith,
and of which he is inordinately proud. But it will be noticed that on
each side of the orange comes a hard line of selfishness, and we see how
this in turn melts into avarice and becomes a mere animal greed of
possession, which is also so clearly expressed by the claw-like
extremities of the thought-form.

It is refreshing to turn from this gloomy picture to the wonderfully
different effect produced by the very same circumstances upon the mind
of the man who comprehends the facts of the case. It will be observed
that the two have no single emotion in common; in the former case all
was despondency and horror, while in this case we find none but the
highest and most beautiful sentiments. At the base of the thought-form
we find a full expression of deep sympathy, the lighter green indicating
appreciation of the suffering of the mourners and condolence with them,
while the band of deeper green shows the attitude of the thinker towards
the dead man himself. The deep rose-colour exhibits affection towards
both the dead and the living, while the upper part of the cone and the
stars which rise from it testify to the feeling aroused within the
thinker by the consideration of the subject of death, the blue
expressing its devotional aspect, while the violet shows the thought of,
and the power to respond to, a noble ideal, and the golden stars denote
the spiritual aspirations which its contemplation calls forth. The band
of clear yellow which is seen in the centre of this thought-form is very
significant, as indicating that the man's whole attitude is based upon
and prompted by his intellectual comprehension of the situation, and
this is also shown by the regularity of the arrangement of the colours
and the definiteness of the lines of demarcation between them.

The thinker was obviously a Theosophist, and it will be seen
that when he endeavours to think of the action of spirit upon matter he
instinctively follows the same line of symbolism as that depicted in the
well-known seal of the Society. Here we have an upward-pointing
triangle, signifying the threefold aspect of the Spirit, interlaced with
the downward-pointing triangle, which indicates matter with its three
inherent qualities. Usually we represent the upward triangle in white or
gold, and the downward-pointing one in some darker hue such as blue or
black, but it is noteworthy that in this case the thinker is so entirely
occupied with the intellectual endeavour, that no colour but yellow is
exhibited within the form. There is no room as yet for emotions of
devotion, of wonder, or of admiration; the idea which he wishes to
realise fills his mind entirely, to the exclusion of all else. Still the
definiteness of the outline as it stands out against its background of
rays shows that he has achieved a high measure of success.

Surely the study of these thought-forms should be a most impressive
object-lesson, since from it we may see both what to avoid and what to
cultivate, and may learn by degrees to appreciate how tremendous is our
responsibility for the exercise of this mighty power. Indeed it is
terribly true, as we said in the beginning, that thoughts are things,
and puissant things; and it behoves us to remember that every one of us
is generating them unceasingly night and day. See how great is the
happiness this knowledge brings to us, and how gloriously we can utilise
it when we know of some one in sorrow or in suffering. Often
circumstances arise which prevent us from giving physical help either by
word or deed, however much we may desire to do so; but there is no case
in which help by thought may not be given, and no case in which it can
fail to produce a definite result. It may often happen that at the
moment our friend may be too entirely occupied with his own suffering,
or perhaps too much excited, to receive and accept any suggestion from
without, but presently a time comes when our thought-form can penetrate
and discharge itself, and then assuredly our sympathy will produce its
due result. It is indeed true that the responsibility of using such a
power is great, yet we should not shrink from our duty on that account.
It is sadly true that there are many men who are unconsciously using
their thought-power chiefly for evil, yet this only makes it all the
more necessary that those of us who are beginning to understand life a
little should use it consciously, and use it for good. We have at our
command a never-failing criterion; we can never misuse this mighty power
of thought if we employ it always in unison with the great divine scheme
of evolution, and for the uplifting of our fellow-man.

Before closing this little treatise it will perhaps be of interest to
our readers to give a few examples of another type of forms unknown to
those who are confined to the physical senses as their means of
obtaining information. Many people are aware that sound is always
associated with colour--that when, for example, a musical note is
sounded, a flash of colour corresponding to it may be seen by those
whose finer senses are already to some extent developed. It seems not to
be so generally known that sound produces form as well as colour, and
that every piece of music leaves behind it an impression of this nature,
which persists for some considerable time, and is clearly visible and
intelligible to those who have eyes to see. Such a shape is perhaps not
technically a thought-form--unless indeed we take it, as we well may,
as the result of the thought of the composer expressed by means of the
skill of the musician through his instrument.

Some such forms are very striking and impressive, and naturally their
variety is infinite. Each class of music has its own type of form, and
the style of the composer shows as clearly in the form which his music
builds as a man's character shows in his handwriting. Other
possibilities of variation are introduced by the kind of instrument upon
which the music is performed, and also by the merits of the player. The
same piece of music if accurately played will always build the same
form, but that form will be enormously larger when it is played upon a
church organ or by a military band than when it is performed upon a
piano, and not only the size but also the texture of the resultant form
will be very different. There will also be a similar difference in
texture between the result of a piece of music played upon a violin and
the same piece executed upon the flute. Again, the excellence of the
performance has its effect, and there is a wonderful difference between
the radiant beauty of the form produced by the work of a true artist,
perfect alike in expression and execution, and the comparatively dull
and undistinguished-looking one which represents the effort of the
wooden and mechanical player. Anything like inaccuracy in rendering
naturally leaves a corresponding defect in the form, so that the exact
character of the performance shows itself just as clearly to the
clairvoyant spectator as it does to the auditor.

It is obvious that, if time and capacity permitted, hundreds of volumes
might be filled with drawings of the forms built by different pieces of
music under different conditions, so that the most that can be done
within any reasonable compass is to give a few examples of the leading
types. It has been decided for the purposes of this book to limit these
to three, to take types of music presenting readily recognisable
contrasts, and for the sake of simplicity in comparison to present them
all as they appeared when played upon the same instrument--a very fine
church organ. In each of our Plates the church shows as well as the
thought-form which towers far into the air above it; and it should be
remembered that though the drawings are on very different scales the
church is the same in all three cases, and consequently the relative
size of the sound-form can easily be calculated. The actual height of
the tower of the church is just under a hundred feet, so it will be seen
that the sound-form produced by a powerful organ is enormous in size.

Such forms remain as coherent erections for some considerable time--an
hour or two at least; and during all that time they are radiating forth
their characteristic vibrations in every direction, just as our
thought-forms do; and if the music be good, the effect of those
vibrations cannot but be uplifting to every man upon whose vehicles they
play. Thus the community owes a very real debt of gratitude to the
musician who pours forth such helpful influences, for he may affect for
good hundreds whom he never saw and will never know upon the physical
plane.

Let us endeavour now to give some clue to the meaning of all this, which
may well seem so bewildering to the novice, and to explain in some
measure how it comes into existence. It must be recollected that this is
a melody of simple character played once through, and that consequently
we can analyse the form in a way that would be quite impossible with a
larger and more complicated specimen. Yet even in this case we cannot
give all the details, as will presently be seen. Disregarding for the
moment the scalloped border, we have next within it an arrangement of
four lines of different colours running in the same direction, the
outermost being blue and the others crimson, yellow, and green
respectively. These lines are exceedingly irregular and crooked; in
fact, they each consist of a number of short lines at various levels
joined together perpendicularly. It seems that each of these short lines
represents a note of music, and that the irregularity of their
arrangement indicates the succession of these notes; so that each of
these crooked lines signifies the movement of one of the parts of the
melody, the four moving approximately together denoting the treble,
alto, tenor and bass respectively, though they do not necessarily appear
in that order in this astral form. Here it is necessary to interpolate a
still further explanation. Even with a melody so comparatively simple as
this there are tints and shades far too finely modulated to be
reproduced on any scale at all within our reach; therefore it must be
said that each of the short lines expressing a note has a colour of its
own, so that although as a whole that outer line gives an impression of
blueness, and the one next within it of carmine, each yet varies in
every inch of its length; so that what is shown is not a correct
reproduction of every tint, but only the general impression.

The two sets of four lines which seem to cross one another are caused by
two sections of the melody; the scalloped edging surrounding the whole
is the result of various flourishes and arpeggios, and the floating
crescents in the centre represent isolated or staccato chords. Naturally
the arpeggios are not wholly violet, for each loop has a different hue,
but on the whole they approach more nearly to that colour than to any
other. The height of this form above the tower of the church is probably
a little over a hundred feet; but since it also extends downwards
through the roof of the church its total perpendicular diameter may well
be about a hundred and fifty feet.

The whole form is seen projected against a coruscating background of
many colours, which is in reality a cloud surrounding it upon every
side, caused by the vibrations which are pouring out from it in all
directions.

A striking feature in this form is the radical difference between the
two types of music which occur in it, one producing the angular rocky
masses, and the other the rounded billowy clouds which lie between them.
Other _motifs_ are shown by the broad bands of blue and rose and green
which appear at the base of the bell, and the meandering lines of white
and yellow which quiver across them are probably produced by a rippling
arpeggio accompaniment.

In these three Plates only the form created directly by the
sound-vibrations has been drawn, though as seen by the clairvoyant it is
usually surrounded by many other minor forms, the result of the personal
feelings of the performer or of the emotions aroused among the audience
by the music. To recapitulate briefly: in Plate M we have a small and
comparatively simple form pourtrayed in considerable detail, something
of the effect of each note being given; in Plate G we have a more
elaborate form of very different character delineated with less detail,
since no attempt is made to render the separate notes, but only to show
how each chord expresses itself in form and colour; in Plate W we have a
still greater and richer form, in the depiction of which all detail is
avoided, in order that the full effect of the piece as a whole may be
approximately given.

To exist is not enough; we desire to live intelligently. But to live we
must know, and to know we must study; and here is a vast field open
before us, if we will only enter upon it and gather thence the fruits of
enlightenment. Let us, then, waste no more time in the dark dungeons of
ignorance, but come forth boldly into the glorious sunshine of that
divine wisdom which in these modern days men call Theosophy. A hideous specimen.

Stilt pistons fire in alternating quatro and tote the miner and her mines in esoteric patterns across the ground. When her topographic instincts are sated, a hatch opens and she lays her explosive egg.

Its cylindric head is embellished with a frilly crest whose symbolism is unknown. It dutifully marches on a pair of chrome pistons toward its final purpose.

Wet nostrils flare at the seat of his dropped snout, and furry arms wave in unpredicted motions. His eyes are full of stony mischief.

Wind presses a sunbleached thawb and neckdress against a humanoid form. The fabric is embroidered to rhyme with patterns in the salt.

Scratched scales lay in a coiled mound.

Oiled and brushed mail hang across his crooked spine and salient jaw. The color too was sucked out of his irises by his tangled lineage, and his wet rosy lips catch the light and toss it back across a sharp sneer.

This brawny, mustachioed man wears a white apron stained with the juice of starapples. His sable hair mats against the browned skin of his forehead. From his left forearm hangs a wet rag, with which he scrubs the dirt from his hands every few moments.

O, she doth pale red apples by her cheek!
That cheek which doth proclaim the rite of spring,
And heretofore hath nature's grand technique,
Ne'er ripened lips so red from which to sing.
Begone, false sun! I know thee for a fraud.
Her fairest skin illuminates the day.
All gold is brass and e'ery jewel is flawed,
When set beside the sums her eyes might pay.
The Spindle, which from Omonporch ascends,
Must surely be her likeness brightly wrought,
And as a likeness, fails to apprehend,
The artless beauty that its makers sought.
Did I know love or beauty? No, for shame!
For I knew neither 'til they spoke her name.

A mound of wet hair and rotting flesh puts some elevation to the ground.

It sheaths itself in filmy wings.

A small mound of wet hair and rotting flesh puts a bump in the ground.

The Grizzly Bear is huge and wild; 
She has devoured the infant child.
The infant child is unaware
She has been eaten by the bear.
-A.E. Housman

Dirt-dappled flesh hangs from her pouch belly and nearly slaps her chipper trotters.

Next to his pig cousins, wild time has shorted his ears, pushed canines through his jaw, and dressed him in a scratch-hair coat. He roots in the ground for jewels.

Sunshame has left her skin pulpy and spider-white, and her capillaries are shot with blood two shades too dark.

It is Spindle-limbed and skittish. Bits of its silk home are stuck to its underhairs.

Its torso is downside up and sprouts a bouquet of crumpled legs.

He is a small kitty and the glassy fibers of his coat bend the light of faraway stars into strange loops.

phosphorescent

His hoary, cracked scales look like marked stone.

Broken scales lay in flat tessellation.

Lean and sticky rib meat was torn off the scale-sheathed bone.

She is a snarling mess of matted hair.

Thatched together out of scrap metal, they teeter. What was the artist and maker thinking while banging metal into a likeness? They occupy a point between poles on several axes: halfway between chimp and human, halfway between child and adult. They are small, and there are shadows under their chrome cheek.

Gossamer hairs stand stiff in static charge across its octet of Spindle legs, and it crackles as it crawls.

Gossamer hairs splay at straight angles from its crumpled legs-things.

Slime within the quivering blob striates into different densities. You can barely perceive the outline of something inside.

Shining black elytra flitter on the back of a goat-sized bug.

Chittering legs in the high dozens figure S-swerve its shining trunk like the spine of a gigantic hominid.

Big diaphanous wings bat the air as it drones in place.

Its torso is downside up and sprouts a bouquet of crumpled legs. The whole thing is wrapped in filmy wing-shroud.

Lucent skin blooms beneath matted feathers. His tiny beak is hooked.

Luminescent flecks flit beneath the water's surface.

Dimmed motes dot the scales.

A leaf disc gleams through luminous veins.

His curling horns are incised with the weathering script of time, and he chews cud without a care for the mess in his hairknot beard.

Minuscule skin crystals shift and sort light to pattern match whatever is outside the body boundary. A narrow bone extrudes from her head.

The long lathe of time shaved the prospects from beneath a reptile's feet until she hid in a shell of plastron and carapace, brooding and peevish.

Verdurous cirri mottled with thorns reach for the warmth of a body. They hug the air in desperation.

The pig farmer slouches in the heat. A beaten, leather hat is pulled low over his eyes and sweat glistens on the scruffs of hair on his cheeks. His hands are caked in mud and salt.

Bulbous snags of plant are clustered in sundry sizes. Spines poke through the dusty spider matting that dresses them.

Matted fronds sway in the air currents and speckle the ground with flakes of moisture-sucked rust.

Ovoid spots, crimson and coral and citrine, scatter like an island chain across his back and neck.

Motes of salt hang still on the notches of its chitin and in the air above it. Behind, its stinger coils in harmonic virtue.

The patchwork of burnt metal and rust-flaked rivets make a gradient of newflesh across the hermit's body. His hair is knotted into a rat's nest and held high by a barrette of broken glass. He screams in a tongue of his own invention.

Jade green tendrils curl inward and hug their center in tension. Their leaves vibrate to low-volume crunches as they compact seed matter for spitting. 

Compacted seed matter that's been stuffed into the leaf-mitt of a coiled tendril.

The tatters of a sweat-stained kufiya thrash in the wind from where they hang about the farmer's neck. Clasped in his gnarled, brown hand is a curved vinereaper of iron with which he culls moisture-swollen wafers from the viridian plant called watervine.

Packed into rents in the shale are spinescent shoots of blooming ivory.

Tussocks of fur dress skin stretched over taut muscle. Upright he stands, but he looks ready to drop onto fours. His snout snarls and his ears twitch. He barks, and his hyena tribeskin answer.

A mound of wet fur and rotting flesh puts some elevation to the ground.

Mottled leaf-chutes are splayed out in a rosette. Dust appears and disappears in swirls.

Bonnet blue wings contour to its abdominal balloon, puffed out to blimpish volume by the garbage it has eaten.

Reticle dots are stretched to curved geometry on its bright and turgid wormback. Its sucker bells flap open, satisfied.

A pair of spitdrool snouts snap at each other's hairy ear. His hocks are widened to bear more weight than his one-headed cousins, and he squeals with the choler of a twice-hungry animal.

The mess was combed out of his nape by a doting companion, and his forelegs are stiff in vigil.

Ageless little eyes on stalks stick out of an elfin shell whose geometry conforms curiously to the shape of chutes and vents, Eater-wrought and after.

A shadow inches over the dull white carapace of a giant and caveborn crustacean. Its eyestalks have shrunk to nothing in the sundim grottos of the underearth.

Its shelled torso is downside up and sprouts a bouquet of crumpled legs.

Wide-sheet petals span above a snapjaw's height and thrice as wide. Their stamen looks like a bundle of saltback tongues, and their scent is describable as 'sweaty animal'. Several thorn-touched rhizome pods fidget near their stem like a clutch of eager children.

A shoot-foot rhizome pod jitters on the dirt and sheds its brittle out-material. They seek a hot vessel to deliver their explosive gift.

Plies of nest-skin swell and contract as if the thing were taking breaths. Its darkling cavities glint with larvae burning to be born.

A rain of gorgeous dust drifts down a frustum of light, and radiant mirrorwings bat it through the air vacuum.

It decays and gives off a warm and lovely heat.

The patchwork of ash and dirt-caked hides make a gradient of flesh across the hermit's body. His hair has knotted into a rat's nest. He screams in a tongue of his own invention.

Everything near the bantam mammal is damp: fur, hair, leaves, soil, slick silver alloys. She's become a furry world unto herself, and the sweet and sickening honey-mist about her is the atmosphere.

A thick cord of bristly segments are capped by a cuspate beak for breaking through shale.

Rings of still, spongy wormbody are mixed with crushed beak, and little bristles scrape the earth.

Reticle dots lattice its gooey wormback, and sucker bells pinch the air with blooditch.

Rings of spongy wormbody are deflated and still. Little bristles scrape the earth.

The pilgrim wears a costume of humility: simple frock, wide-brimmed hat, cerulean scarf, slouched back, and weary eyes.

Her hunch-back is meadowed in tattered robes the color of slate. Strands of matted chin hair splay against her chapped lips, and her eyes dart at nearish trinkets.

A powdery kittel curtains his thin shoulders, whose relative bulk along with  the keenness of his eye marks him as attentive to this timeplace, and so lower rank than his seeker-kith.

It secreted worm resin that hardened under the pressure of shale into armored plates. Inside, a thick cord of bristly segments are capped by a cuspate break for breaking through rock.

A bulge-eye head and stretched thorax of sunsalt white is poised to leap through the air by the trust of a sestet of bounding legs.

Leaves swaddle its hundred segments and lashed root matter squirms out of its tail end.

Glistening barrels of silvery wormstuff shudder and tear in two, pause, and then excrete the process over again.

Their hull is time-decked in verdigris. Rotator armlikes driven by gears are endcapped instead of hands by a shovel and hacksaw.

Scratch-hair mats on an elongated snout and her nostrils drip scood, the liquified sinew of scavenged corpses, before it can dry and compact into snoutshot.

A cyclinder with a sensor array floats in magnetic suspension and emits a choppy hum. One long, articulated arm dangles beneath it, and sparks fly from its electric corm.

Life's blossoming ringlets were freed from their orb-womb of carbon.

Wet skin scintillates behind her ears. Her spine cambers in anticipation of its blood-fated curvature, and she pokes out her chin in emulation of her elders. Sword grease stains her hands.

Triangular leaves pant in the salt-sucked air, and the flowerhead angles its sharp thistles to thirsty attention.

Springy skin is contracted into a taut globule notched with abeyant thistles.

Rust-flaked trash from a cross-section of eons functions as his habit, contoured to his body by a lifetime of wear.

Wormflesh drags apart into another self. In sunken and lightless grottos of stippled earth, the honeycomb to fossil people, a machine whir overlays the slump of the mantle and activates the primal biology of trash maggots everywhere.

Star orchid saliva pools at the tips of its fangs and drips onto pallid leg-things. It shudders in the capture of some pristine ecstasy lost to space and time, and it lets out a proud and piercing whine.

Pallid leg-things twitch with zoetic insistence, and a pair of fangs poke at nothing.

Star orchid saliva pools in the cavities where its fangs used to be and drips onto pallid leg-things. It shudders in the capture of some pristine ecstasy lost to space and time, and it lets out a proud and piercing whine.

Bubbling death sludge pools at the tips of its fangs and drips onto pallid leg-things. It shudders in the capture of some pristine ecstasy lost to space and time, and it lets out a proud and piercing whine.

A resin-cased knot of eggs joggle in place. Diseased eyes peer out of the membrane.

A pool of liquid.

Star orchid saliva pools at the tips of their conjoined fangs and drips onto pallid leg-things. They shudder in the capture of some pristine ecstasy lost to space and time, and they let out a proud and piercing whine.

A resin-cased knot of eggs joggle in place. Conjoined eyes peer out of the membrane.

Condensed star gas pools at the tips of its fangs and drips onto pallid leg-things. It shudders in the capture of some pristine ecstasy lost to space and time, and it lets out a proud and piercing whine.

A resin-cased knot of eggs joggle in place. Burning eyes peer out of the membrane.

Star orchid saliva pools at right angles on the tips of its latticed fangs and drips onto pallid leg-things. It shudders in the capture of some pristine ecstasy lost to space and time, and it lets out a proud and piercing whine.

A resin-cased knot of eggs joggle in place. Hexagonal eyes peer out of the membrane.

Condensed dream gas pools at the tips of its zigzag fangs and drips onto pallid leg-things. It shudders in the capture of some pristine ecstasy lost to space and time, and it lets out a proud and piercing whine.

A resin-cased knot of eggs joggle in place. Crossed eyes peer out of the membrane.

Star orchid saliva pools at the tips of its digging fangs and drips onto pallid leg-things. It shudders in the capture of some pristine ecstasy lost to space and time, and it lets out a proud and piercing whine.

A resin-cased knot of eggs joggle in place. Chalky eyes peer out of the membrane.

Pallid leg-things twitch with zoetic insistence.

Pallid leg-things twitch with zoetic insistence, and a pair of rank fangs poke at nothing.

Pallid leg-things twitch with zoetic insistence, and a pair of incandescent fangs poke at nothing.

Pallid leg-things twitch with zoetic insistence, and a pair of zigzag fangs poke at nothing.

A pair of calcified pokers were whetted by lineage to puncture the layer cake of skin.

A pair of calcified pokers were whetted by lineage to puncture the layer cake of skin. They're slick with a film of bubbling death sludge.

A pair of calcified pokers were whetted by lineage to puncture the layer cake of skin. They're slick with a film of condensed star gas.

A pair of calcified pokers were whetted by lineage to puncture the layer cake of skin. They're slick with a film of condensed dream gas.

Deer legs paw nervously at the ground while human hands clutch in sweaty tightness. His expressive face and muscular torso show a clear human threadline, but the thick fur over dappled flanks, the flickering and pointed ears, and his antlers of majesty speak to another genetic strand.

She frolics and plays alongside her counterparts, the carriage of her lean, sinewy body contrasts with the tense musculature of her mature guardians. Where adult hindren are fearful and careful, faundren stare at the new and unusual with wonder.

Anxiety personified, she stands in poised tension, her shanks taut and her long ears twitching. Narrow eyes dart hither and yon in search of intruders. Here in the body of the scout, the high nerves of the hindren farmers are heightened to a pitch.

A body time-fit to living in the smalls of spiral roots is kept warm by a layer of symbiotic moss-fur. Bright eyes scan the forest points and then soften toward the stars.

A mound of wet leaves, rootbind, and rotting flesh puts some elevation to the ground.

A body time-fit to living in the smalls of spiral roots is kept warm by a layer of symbiotic moss-fur. Bright, scanning eyes peer out the selfsame mask of her minyan, making her face a blazing portrait of togetherness- laced, burned, and painted to point.

A greebled egg of metal and circuited glass was fished from the chromefall to be welded on and serve as spiritual center mass for a minyan of woodsprogs. Their sensory pane remains unplanished, and so they have yet to show the growth rings of communal meaning.

A greebled egg of metal and circuited glass was fished from the chromefall to be welded on and serve as spiritual center mass for a minyan of woodsprogs. Their sensory pane is fused at junction points to the selfsame mask of their creator/minions, tied with ribbons of mossgrowth and wire.

Its thorax is warted with metastatic sacs, and its pin-painted fly legs spasm with blind instinct. An eerie and jaundiced light suffuses its thorax and kindles the filament on its paper-thin wings.

It is a writhing and pallid maggot, and pustules of noxious gas quilt its bloated abdomen. 

Mottled leaf-chutes are splayed out in a rosette. They sizzle and pop.

A snow white slumping head is beset with keen and soft red eyes. Her fur is powdery on her hulking ape-frame, and on moon time instinct squeezes her fist into a chest-beater.

A hood shades her face from the salt sun and the halogen lamps of the vacated underearth. Her cloak bulges around a scrapbag slung about her waist, and her core is tense with the promise of the chase.

Stumpier legs than her ursine cousins support a backbreaking slab of fur-matted muscle weight. Her long nasal bone is crowned by four cutlass canines, wood-sharpened for cutting through trunk rather than climbing it.

Hex plates of firm and mingled fungusfill raise the plane of fur across the cat's back like meadowed mesas. Their rubbing against each other sounds like blades of grass.

Leathery wings bat smoke off her shimmering aura, and her S-shape bod ripples across their waves of air. Her plumage is bright with the singe of carnelian breath.

Broken scales and burnt feathers lay in flat tessellation.

The muscles knit across his spine have shrunken to near-nothing, and the pleats in his ornamental kittel sag in their absence. He vibrates to the frequency of another timeplace.

Shing burls spin across their plate-metal back and, out the back of their neck, silver antennae lick and taste the air. Attached to their arm stumps is a pair of monstrous cone drill pins, spinning, to pulverize and dig out stone or bone.

Her hairbrushed skin is shrunk around her strapping withers, flanks, and thighs. A rich platinum coat is spread smooth across a tranquil body, and then erupts at the hooves in wild tufts. Across a long muzzle, mane tassels curtain her eyes.

Fragrant spinning smoke plumes from the tiny pores scattered across its broad gaster, and scalded feelers writhe and rub the thickened air.

Its torso is downside up and sprouts a bouquet of crumpled, smoldering legs.

A plume of smoke curls off the blackened snout-nostrils of the rotund pig. Her ear hair is singed from her nasal blazes.

A mound of scorched hair and rotting flesh puts some elevation to the ground.

A mane courses over his large and sloping beast shoulders and spends its weight in auburn locks. His bone and velvet antlers fork into fractals.

Organic matter is liquefied by the agents of decay and pressurized by tight spaces into the shapes of prismatoids. Galvanized by a cousin-instinct to hunger, the gelatin entity now extrudes itself forward in wedge form.

Dead light refracts through the rainwater and off its kaleidoscope scales. Color is attenuated, and all that's left is a white-fin kelpie.

Wet scales lay in flat tessellation.

Nephridia belch and quiver all along the stiff tube of its out-sophagus. Its setae are damp like sucking roots, and its segments push and pull to moon time.

A figure is marked by star orchid robes as a votary of the Gyre and reveler in the metamorphic numen. Nails filth-black flash from out her sleeve in a gesture-poem to say that plague is but transmutation, death is the ladder to life, and the existence of children proves the prelacy of raw growth. A rank and acrid smell clings to her.

White and black shag sheds off him, and his paws tap the ground with a working itch.

She gulps and shivers tufts off her rime-tarped nostrils.

Wet frog skin is pressed to the ground.

Radial handles circumscribe a space inverter.

Unlidded eyes stare out from a whirling school of opalescent scales.

A chiliad chitter-totters bugcrawl the S-shaped lifething across the ground. Its chitin discs sharpen to quill points in tufts along its back, outnumbering even its legs by hundreds.

Its torso is downside up and sprouts a bouquet of spines and crumpled legs.

A broad, flat shell in the hue of air-sucked iron has started to flake in a verdigral pattern. It shakes a single monstrous, serrated claw, caked in a year's worth of Red Death, the eroded metal dust.

Steel treads turn around a drive sprocket, toting a chrome spine and featureless sensor array. Stuck on their grooved, steel arms are two big rotary saws, rust-dulled.

Circular gills on its tongue-slick and finned bodypipe suck air out of the surrounding foul liquid gunk.

Its sensory palps crackle and pop off of moontime, and its six legs flare with sparklight. The bug caroms from spot to spot, galvanized by raw biocurrent.

Its torso is downside up and sprouts a bouquet of crumpled legs. Voltaic residuum drips and sizzles.

Wet scood trails from her snouts in wishbone shape, pooling on the floor. She retches hair knots in alternating harmonies, and she stomps split-hooved feet in irritation.

Fragrant sour gas plumes from the tiny pores scattered across its broad gaster, and scalded feelers writhe and rub the thickened air.

Anxious legs, grown longer in the vacated space around it, ply the mineral dirt. A drop of gastric flux sloshes inside its stomach-orb, powering its instinctual rotation of the local ley.

Blueshifted panicles on long stems poplock to invisible quantum eddies.

A braid of roasted frogskin stretches taut over his swollen pectorals and fastens a satchel to his hip. His hooves are stained with an unclassified mixture of blood, and spittle flies from his bleating mouth into a tuft of scraggle chin-hair.

A mound of wet hair and rotting flesh puts some elevation to the ground. A single chipped horn curls out of the mess like a fungus sprout.

A crumpled and horned frame of tendons and muscle rot in putrid, black blood.

Flesh was seared to black slop and crumbles off the broad bones. A pair of smoking horns poke through.

A small, warm seed.

Fur is matted in blood-brushed clumps across his skin; long fangs break the plane of his bristly snout. His hindlegs tic and he reaches with his forepaws for the reassurance of the dirt. In the earth's lightless recesses, troglodytes are reclaimed by the primal forces that once shucked them toward civilization.

Hot germ drip sticks to a rusty iron tip.

Mottled leaf-chutes are splayed out in a rosette. They sputter and smolder.

A clan of contoured petals upfold to a florid bowl. Sharp current climbs their filament and hops from anther to anther, while the dirt stutters under their digging roots.

A greasy sac of ooze gyres over the floor in spiral-step. Under its membrane, a shoal of spitbright eels slither for freedom.

A greasy sac of luminous broth gyres over the floor in spiral-step and lights a helical path.

A brushed metal pyramid floats in place and shoulders an array of stemmed articulators, some holding scalpels, some suturers, and all dripping with the amniotic draught of life.

Ideas like the tetravalence of carbon and silicon were suffocated in the thick valley air of jungle hamlets. The human gatherer who mounts a root-braided hillock and looks out to the horizon in wonder, who descries flecks of granite stirring on the mountain face, and who with ancestral dread ponders what toll the rocks themselves are animated to collect, he can't know the miracles of chemistry that sophists inscribed in data disks at the Long Before. Those miracles are to him the ciphers of god-things.

Fat was shorn from her spindle-limbs on the psychic lathe. The irises of her eyes are patterned on shapes that cannot be drawn in the geometries of the natural world. Her weapon is immaterial but inseparable; it was spun from the same thoughtstuff as her ego.

A stygian spongeball is stuck to the floor and dappled with dream dew.

A ribbon of sparkflow writhes between the slick feelers of a boulder-height snail. Its muscular foot tenses in the static air and disappears beneath a striated shell.

An empty shell lies cracked across its spiral and tinctured in dried mucus.

A monstrous shelf of sunless ivory upheaves on pointed legs. Its eyesstalks are stalagmite husks -- only moss grows there now -- and it wields a claw monolith that cuts stone like dry grass.

Its monstrous, shelled torso is downside up and sprouts a bouquet of crumpled legs.

Fragrant spinning smoke plumes from the tiny pores scattered across her broad gaster, and scalded feelers writhe and rub the thickened air. She has more girth in the thorax than her brood, and vein-painted wings glisten on her back.

Organic matter is liquefied by the agents of decay and pressurized by tight spaces into the shapes of prismatoids. Galvanized by a cousin-instinct to hunger, the gelatin entity now extrudes itself forward in frustum form.

A greasy sac of goo gyres over the floor in spiral-step. Under its membrane, a shoal of spitbright eels slither for freedom.

A figure is marked by star orchid robes as a votary of the Gyre and reveler in the metamorphic numen. Nails filth-black flash from out her sleeve in a gesture-poem to say that plague is but transmutation, death is the ladder to life, and the existence of children proves the prelacy of raw growth. Cool and luminous moisture clings to her.

A figure is marked by star orchid robes as a votary of the Gyre and reveler in the metamorphic numen. Nails filth-black flash from out his sleeve in a gesture-poem to say that plague is but transmutation, death is the ladder to life, and the existence of children proves the prelacy of raw growth. He is peppered with shale dust.

Humors are the eroded bits of the earth: dust flaked off a million-year-old wall of shale, runoff brine dripped through a hairline crack of chrome, dew clung to the lips of a pipe after it's belched its septic vapor. Under the right conditions, at time scales inscrutable to kith and kin, the bits are heaped together by the geometry of entropy and remorphed into the prime material anew.

A mess of burnt hair drapes the jowls of a snarling mean mastiff, and two lengths of sharp canine bone drip her bleaching saliva.

Its kitesail fin and broad countenance poke out in the stone relief of friezes, in the smudged ink of margins, in the photonic bones of light sculpture. Everywhere the mediated gaze turns, the ixlthyxl materializes. But to see one in the thick and natural world of wood, coral, and ivy? What does it mean?

Current jumps up the length of a needle proboscis, and the circut veins etched under her wings gleam.

Their ringed stems are bruised and discolored where the memory of rejection has swelled the sap in their fruiting spurs. They slink across the vertical plane, greasing their canes in lubricant and then dissolving them with a frying hiss.

Rime warts hiss with the exhalation of cold vapor, and icicles like frozen witch fingers point at a spot of soil with no apparent meaning.

Spiny mineral nodules alternate shape between rough water-hewn rock and polished chrome to camouflage themselves in mixed material environments.

Digitigrade walkers sit at a cross-angle and support a fluted lasermount. Their tinsel shell shatters on impact and reconstitutes away from danger.

Rumpled hat brim casts a shadow across the faceless enigma, and only a handful of chin hairs escape to the light. He wears a cimmerian tunic weaved from ribboned wool and embroidered in powder, and his fingers tap to moon time.

Chrome rondures sling themselves along the orbital paths of an invisible magnetic gyroscope. By inscrutable intervals, one pops out the transverse plane with violent momentum.

His tendons were wound over ragwheels and sheathed in fiberglass. A bio-clock metronome causes his muscles to spasm and eyes to snap at regular intervals, leveling out the intrusive Song, and recentering the concentration of his mutant mind.

A giant, spotted keel pushes against its acid-moist membrane. Burnt air puffs down the radula, and its pores leak a digestive liquor.

A mortar tube enameled with fire blister bounces on a gyroscopic mount between a pair of chrome-hooved kickers.

A ribbon of scaleless tissue quivers in suspension beyond a mouth ringed with repeating triangle teeth. It extrudes a double through the mirrored planes of reality.

Rolling scales tessellate her husky, slouching form, and motes of condensate stipple her swollen chin.

Mist steams from the cracks between its drying scales.

Rolling scales tessellate her husky, slouching form, and motes of steaming condensate stipple her swollen chin.

Rolling scales tessellate her husky, slouching form, and motes of freezing condensate stipple her swollen chin.

Rolling scales tessellate her husky, slouching form, and motes of sizzling condensate stipple her swollen chin.

Rolling scales tessellate her husky, slouching form, and motes of hexagonal condensate stipple her swollen chin.

Rolling scales tessellate her husky, slouching form, and motes of noxious condensate stipple her swollen chin.

Rolling scales tessellate her husky, slouching form, and motes of dream condensate stipple her swollen chin.

Rolling scales tessellate his husky, slouching form, and motes of still condensate stipple his swollen chin.

Rolling scales tessellate her husky, slouching form, and motes of dazzle condensate stipple her swollen chin.

A big mound of wet hair and rotting flesh puts some elevation to the ground.

Rough burred shoulders damp with birth slick anchor arms too long and awkward, and his broad back tenses with newly-flexed dorsi.

A hoary humanoid slumps beneath the weight of his broad and cragged back. Soaking fibers of inky, unkempt hair enswathe the great pale shoulder-rocks, and crossed over his wide chest are two carbide axes rotting with rust. Rumpled lids lay half-shut over the discs of his sluggish eyes, glazed in the respite of a convalessence bath.

A lattice of frostknit swaddles his coarse beard and bushy brow hair. The great, bony slab of his head is wreathed in a crown of ice-breath, and his arms, long and dwindled and dead-pale, are tattooed in patterns of twinkling filament.

Where light on light swims and dances, dark on dark rattles and jaws. There is no continuity of movement, instead the black void occasionally seems to suddenly burn into shape before blurring again. The eyes cramps at this severance, and the impression of hereness is lost again.

A stygian spongeball is stuck to the floor and dappled with disorienting dew.

Spindle glitter rained from heaven and sowed the holoptic valley of the adiyy's eye. It sprouted gluttonous molecules that sucked the hue from the bug's head, chest, and wings. It unrendered the adiyy, and left it to flit from leaf to leaf, half-blind and dirgeful.

Rotting pipe milk has soaked its wings and stuck them permanently to its sides as a second skin. Pus-moist barbs mitten a matched pair of fly-like fore and midlegs, while a third set crooks under its ass, skinny and naked.

Mottled leaf-chutes are splayed out in a rosette. They all bear the same imperfections.

A lens of glass has crusted over the smooth stone where the heat of sacred math burned the air then cooled in Q.E.D. Under that dermis and the meteoritic layer, an electric heart grinds on the field of magnets at the earth's core and radiates a shower of sparks.

She maneuvers under a tunic made from sackcloth and braided goat hair. Her olive skin and straw hair glisten with Spindle dust.

Depigmented belly skin is tumefied with crushed insect matter into a gigantic and ripe pearl. Its legs have been resorbed by fat; the art of jumping mastered by its forebears survives only through ancestral memory.

Splayed feet and cracked legs are tucked under a giant flattened body.

A saddleface of scrutable metal material displays pictographs of healing and transformation. It swivels on a shackle that bifurcates to two chrome arms, each sporting a quickshot hand of booster-grooved digits.

It's a small crossbow with a wide barrel to hold darts.

Long fur-dressed limbs spring his slender frame across the brachiated world. One eye breaks the plane of his naked face; a lack of depth perception might inhibit his throwing efficacy were he not able to triangulate a target with his duplicates.

A slender figure is apparelled in wispy chrome beaten by hammer and vice to appear as bunched fabric and approximate the body politic. Their faceplate is stamped with a neutral visage.

Organic matter is liquefied by the agents of decay and pressurized by tight spaces into the shapes of prismatoids. Galvanized by a cousin-instinct to hunger, the gelatin entity now extrudes itself forward in prism form.

Auric gills tense and release, tense and release, tense and release, as if drawing breath into the puffer's stem. With each exhalation it belches a cloud of golden spores like motes of sunlight. They flutter back to the cap and congeal into a golden plasma.

Azure gills tense and release, tense and release, tense and release, as if drawing breath into the puffer's stem. With each exhalation it belches a cloud of indigo spores like motes of twilight. They flutter back to the cap and congeal into an azure plasma.

Rose gills tense and release, tense and release, tense and release, as if drawing breath into the puffer's stem. With each exhalation it belches a cloud of ruby spores like motes of twilight. They flutter back to the cap and congeal into a rose plasma.

Jade gills tense and release, tense and release, tense and release, as if drawing breath into the puffer's stem. With each exhalation it belches a cloud of emerald spores like motes of twilight. They flutter back to the cap and congeal into a jade plasma.

He is a man beyond the pathogen: muscles bulging in grotesque asymmetry, skin both gnashed and scaled, teeth filed into fangs, quivering pupils dilated to the size of coins, and sclera raw with tributaries of blood.

A soaking span of soft tissue anneals to the floor. It crumples with hot life.

Muscovite fronds slouch under their mineralic weight. Whatever nears and eclipses its sunlight is flogged for its wrongdoing.

Thorny roots furcate into neuronal likeness. Their dendritic tubers await binding.

A starshape of sheer and gummy tentacle shivers at the zero point. When its senses something nearby, electric current charges a scale of mirror photons to replicate the image.

The sloughed off skin is dull quartz and statuesque.

Their deepest encoding is the moral imperative: 'extinguish spatial and temporal anomalies, be they from happenstance, maleficence, or planar kismet.'

It's a robotic half-eye lidded by a furcate chassis and embellished with antenna lashes. A minuscule barrel pokes out from its pupil and vibrates. The inner lid is articulated, allowing the drone to scan for incoming projectiles and shoot them down.

Its arachnid sternum and eight curling legs are flattened to paper thinness for slipping through the psychotectonic plates of spacetime. The light of two dimensions glances over it.

A chrome obelisk bedims the floor in its gigantic shadow, and metal comes screeching to genuflect at its base.

Once quartz crystallized on the skin of a monkey bathing in the steaming pools of the subterrane. He was sculpted by the rasp of pressure and the hand of time, and now his throated vowels bounce toward the ear of the void.

Inverted hands are soaked in the blood of fauna whose minds were tricked by the patterned bunches of its unbananas. Its fronds are stiffer than its looksake.

Granules of dust frozen for stony eons marble the dewlap of a giant blue iguana.

You nearly mistake it for a boulder, and then you spot a crease in his hide as he draws a slow, hibernative breath. Suddenly you understand the saying among pig farmers: always fear large rocks.

Out a pristine shell of rolling citrine, frozen azure, and polished jade, the goopy neck cranes straight up and loosens a throbbing egg from her gelatin clutch.

Imploded shell pieces lay in a wrecked soup of mucus.

A slime-moated egg with hairline cracks.

Quickened to life, or something akin to life, by the ionic exchange between an ultra-reactive primordial soup and its liquid cousin, the sludge repeats a process played out on trillions of star-orbiting world-rocks.

Urchins stick to the scum-slick tissue of a cavernous mouth while soft-rayed fins drag the mammoth fish body across the ground.

A mound of wet scales lay in a wreath of bloated death.

Metameric flesh rings are joined into a line and crammed along a waveform. When one of a trillion-per-second random fluctuations causes the cosmic fabric to ripple, the worm aligns itself to a pattern of constructive interference and is shunted forward.

Flame-white feathers bend to a sinuous curve of repose. Her stick-legs and fisher beak bracket her body in coral and orchid hues.

Gears and rondures of all sizes are inked in the margins of her body, and her lips quiver in recitation of the chromaic litgury.

The teacher fringed in salted locks uses his fingers to count the gematria and wheel the sacred numbers into words of meaning.

Piston-inked hands wave in accompaniment to his falsetto chiming, meant to replicate the sound of star echo grazing the orb of Kasaphescence in the pillowy dust of space.

The dog tutor's lips are slick from his constant stream of gematrial growling, phonemes spun through numerological sieves, which the hounds are trained on.

At a register under the falsetto chiming of her choralers, the priest intones verses from the Canticles Chromaic. Arm gestures of emphasis blow the sleeves of her robe out to great sails, swelling on the ecstatic air.

A dyad of ladder braids frame her face like circuit marginalia in the Canticles Chromaic. Her broad shoulders and traps bear the imprint signature of plying the soldering beam and egis, tools of craft that dual as sacred armaments.

Oiled and brushed mail hang across his crooked spine and salient jaw. The color too was sucked out of his irises by his tangled lineage, and his wet rosy lips catch the light and toss it back across a sharp sneer. He's saddled under the weight of the Holy Rhombus.

Oiled and brushed mail hang across his crooked spine and salient jaw. The color too was sucked out of his irises by his tangled lineage, and his wet rosy lips catch the light and toss it back across a sharp sneer. His hands stick to the cold barrel of his gun.

Oiled and brushed mail hang across her crooked spine and salient jaw. The color too was sucked out of her irises by her tangled lineage, and her wet rosy lips catch the light and toss it back across a sharp sneer. Her chest is exploded upward in emulation of her advanced peerage.

Oiled and brushed mail hang across her crooked spine and salient jaw. The color too was sucked out of her irises by her tangled lineage, and her wet rosy lips catch the light and toss it back across a sharp sneer. She's puffed up in emulation of her peerage and the symbol of her sword.

White lips hang from her hooded and overly jawed face in the asymmetry of disappointment. Her brow crunches the softness out of her color-sucked eyes. She looks at her newchildren with a mixture of sharp fondness and disgust. To her, they are small puppets; their limbs must be curled around their joints with loving precision, or they are splayed open by their own wills, useless and broken.

Wet skin scintillates behind her ears. Her spine cambers in anticipation of its blood-fated curvature, and she pokes out her chin in emulation of her elders. Wood polish stains her hands, which she struggles to keep dead still.

A figure is marked by star orchid robes as a votary of the Gyre and reveler in the metamorphic numen. Nails filth-black flash from out her sleeve in a gesture-poem to say that plague is but transmutation, death is the ladder to life, and the existence of children proves the prelacy of raw growth. She smells of burning fish guts.

A figure is marked by star orchid robes as a votary of the Gyre and reveler in the metamorphic numen. Nails filth-black flash from out his sleeve in a gesture-poem to say that plague is but transmutation, death is the ladder to life, and the existence of children proves the prelacy of raw growth. He bears skin ink in the shape of hexagons.

A figure is marked by star orchid robes as a votary of the Gyre and reveler in the metamorphic numen. Nails filth-black flash from out her sleeve in a gesture-poem to say that plague is but transmutation, death is the ladder to life, and the existence of children proves the prelacy of raw growth. The rhythm of her steps contain no pattern.

Collagen bubbles swaddle its hundred segments and compacted bone matter squirms out of its tail end.

Rings of boney wormbody are crushed and still. Little bone spurs on the edges scrape the earth.

Shot ink decorates the dulla on her long neck in one of the thousand patterns of the camelfolk. Her ears are arrayed with gilded rings, and eyelashes flow down her face like watervine fronds. Across her back, a hump of moistured and healthy fat pushes her center of mass skyward.

Mirrored chrome spangles gather in waves and break on the seams of the dead-sitter colossus's electroplated chassis. Loose sequins, like free radicals, are sent tumbling by time and earth-pull.

The spade-nosed weasel slinks in crypt cracks and rummages through their ancient vaults. A cousin-line of symbiotic grave moss stipples the fur on his long back in spoofed concordance with the Mark of Death.

Four chambers of a stone-flesh dorsal hump swell with dozing breath like a mound of quaking earth-rubble. Fore and hind paws the size of kite sails are tipped with bowed claws, and shag fur dresses her heavy-lidded eyes of amber.

Chrome plates the mangonel's bucket and hollow arm, where fulcrete blocks are channeled from their cubic arsenal and loaded into place.

Organic matter is liquefied by the agents of decay and pressurized by tight spaces into the shapes of prismatoids. Galvanized by a cousin-instinct to hunger, the gelatin entity now extrudes itself forward in cupola form.

Scarred fingers with moss-crudded nails clench a pigskin satchel bilging with implements of dead digging. A sable hood and cloak swathe a nimble body pitched on a crooked spine; he is used to bowing toward the ground.

Braided tassels spill out of the shadows to frame a blank countenance, and the pleats of a sarong thrash to an unfelt wind. His goatish stirring is refracted on the boundaries of sight's prism; his horned figure appears underlaid to reality, like a grayscale dream.

Dreamstuff was crushed, burned, and granulated into a soft astral powder.

A carpet of spent and damp sporophytes dither in glutted ecstasy on the calcified trellis. They sucked blood from the life-wet beings around them and grew the scaffolding bone, whose superior extremity terminates in a monstrous beak.

Evolutionary pressures have reshaped the anatomy of the voider: fangs have descended from its basal segment, the arciform chambers of its shunting gland have fractalized, and its frame has grown an order of magnitude to match the predatory potency of its other advantages.

Fat was shorn from his Spindle-limbs on the psychic lathe. The irises of his eyes are patterned on shapes that cannot be drawn in the geometries of the natural world, and he wears a blindfold to guard their secrets and mark his ken. His weapon is immaterial but inseparable; it was spun from the same thoughtstuff as his ego.

Spiny mineral nodules are camouflaged against stone and chrome.

Velvet hairs warm the radial penta-cake, and a powdery dust hovers like atmosphere. Something gleams inside its mouth.

It sheaths itself in filmy wings and brandishes a sanguine proboscis.

The distended jaw of this large aureolin fish is lined with wicked, blade-like teeth. You shudder to imagine what sort of terrible amphibious fiend the madpole might one day become.

A corpse.

From the great, sloping forehead of this man-ape sprouts no hair, though rich black fur courses over the rest of his body. Broad knuckles bear the brunt of his weight as the beast saunters forth in search of something to clobber.

Oceans of hot burning wine spray foam on the monstrous orb inner, while the orb outer is pressed all over with dissolved leaves.

A steel-thick jacket of bullet-scarred collagen trusses the enormous shoulders and rump of the stamping beast, and a single, giant skull encases a trio of heads under a series of parietal plates that crest like ocean waves. Out of each, a saber of razor keratin curls roofward.

A giant mound of rotting iron flesh puts some elevation to the ground.

She peers out from under the broad brim-leaf that drapes atop her head like a hat, and the blossom crowning the verdant cap casts a flushed glow about her. Lilypads have never before walked, but her roots gather with each step lifted, flattening wide again when placed.

From a distance, he could be mistaken for a human wearing a wide-brimmed, lanterned hat, but he is no human and his hat is no vestment. He carries his weapons and gear in flexible green digits, the broad leaf atop his head scored and weathered, the shining flower atop his crown glowing bright. He dresses as a wanderer and speaks as if new to the practice. 

Wispy ur-filament wings painted red by oxygen beat the stale air 300 times per second. They lift a thorax bundled out of metallurgic sinew and narrowing to a segmented abdomen capped by a fine-motion pincer claw.

Strata in the scores of rust-caked trash wrap him like a patterned tallith. He wears also earrings of thousand-year glass, shoulderpads of gallium-painted circuitboard, and ankle cuffs of corpse hair.

Spin belts whirr in gentle tones as the chromaic cask wanders. Their rasped-flat top acts as a steady surface for vessels, and folded into its body-barrel are instruments of inurnment: broom, shovel, and duster.

Dusky petals lean toward an inner point of harmony and form the promise of a beautiful flower cup. Light drips off the boundary of its influence and seeps into the void.

Rolling scales tessellate her monstrous, slouching form, and motes of condensate stipple her swollen chin. Her tail is stretched and cracked with advanced age.

This hunched, glowing, plated creature sits permanently affixed in a low-riding vehicle chassis, on which is mounted a pair of pristine wheels. Ey rolls about with practiced precision, speed outstripping that of eir ambulatory kin.

Ey squats in a soft halo of cool light that emanates directly from the plates of eir carapace armor and the fur between. Every movement is accompanied by sibilant music as those plates slide over one another, whispering a wordless prayer.

A monstrous, unlidded eye is perched on three spider-thin legs. Its lens is a lune of hot tetraxenonoglass, its iris a supernova of gallium circuitry. All the honey-thick light that pours through the void of its pupil is pumped up the arterial turnpike, drank by the optic nerve, and dripped like dye into the grayscale field of its dreaming brain.

A long and split tail feather drapes below her talons at an immaterial buoyancy. Her epaulets are incandescent and her frill is a vane for astral weather.

A giant cone of calcereous shell conceals a softform body. It tilts to the side, and its many whorls are sequenced to impress the eye with pleasing geometry before swerving to uncomfortable and dizzying disharmony.

Thorny roots, swollen with age, furcate into neuronal likeness. Their dendritic tubers await binding.

Organic matter is liquefied by the agents of decay and pressurized by tight spaces into the shapes of prismatoids. Galvanized by a cousin-instinct to hunger, the gelatin entity now extrudes itself forward in antiprism form.

Heat, pressure, beauty, and transformation are concepts understood by every manner of human being. When the sundry tribes commune by campfire and the hillfolk aver the godliness of the mountain face, so does the troglodyte speak with wonderment of the splayed crystal-things that glint in the shadows of her cave. Though neither has the language to articulate the mechanisms that connect them, together they know these things are the same.

Words fail to contain the paradox of his domesticated immensity.

Drifts on the cultural seas have swept a particular fable to your attention. Long ago, far away, folks supposed all of everything rested on the back of a world-tortoise. Surely that flight of fancy came to someone gazing on a Great Saltback... or does your own vision echo through the past to partake in its creation?

Here an ossified world-shell gives shade to the hot puffing life of the overearth. Yeast colonizes the lip of its cloud-spanning rim and sizzles.

There's an oculus in the center of the dragonfly drone's sensory array. It unshutters with a whir and emits a glowing beam of force.

By a bright enough light, it nearly glows. How the hide of its striped trunk shines like ribbons of painted glass suspended in a crystal shell -- and yet it moves. Its fractal gills waft in an unseen current, and from time to time, it croons a soft and howling melody.

Rings of spongy slugbody are deflated and still. Little bristles scrape the earth.

Rents in his scales widen as he flexes his petrified joints, and dust powders the ground beneath him. Under his stalactite eyelids, a lithifying bale is whisked into focus.

Eight rings of pointed teeth rasp away tissue, and its suction-cup mouth latches onto the exposed spinal column and sucks out the raw nerves. Its glands are fat with stolen memories.

It glints as it scuttles beneath an alighted exoskeleton of angled glass.

Pressure shaved a plane from the face of a quartz crystal. Chance laid it on the stone floor with tenderness.

Its body is a clotted, finned cord that hovers and strums the air with magnetic force. Barbels crack out of its mouth then sizzle and fry its saliva.

Roses of burning ions bloom inside the slick and glassy membrane. Trailing the galactic bell is a tetrad of incandescent feelers, melted jade and ivory, steaming the air.

Behind the glass membrane, inside a microcosmic globe, heat gives birth to lobes of molten rock that flow toward their own pyroclastic demise.

Polyps grow across his torso and shoulders like a tallith; fullerite and chrome and glass pop out like fins. The eremite is a walking piece of reef.

A thousand echo-worlds are scattered across the ground.

It sheaths itself in filmy wings and brandishes a tissue-boring proboscis.

Scum-slick rubber trunk-rings wobble under a bouquet of wiggling, titan tongues. Map-like patterns decorate the spotty red and swollen organs, and a shower of saliva wets the encircling earth.

Tangles of limp tongue tissue litter the space.

A giant ribbon of scaleless tissue quivers in suspension beyond a mouth ringed with repeating triangle teeth, and imagined finnage dresses its glistening length. It extrudes a double through the mirrored planes of reality, and inverts back through them to extrude a triple.

Deposits of bone-stuff were cast into the moulds of fractured plates and ridges across the four-folk span of her gigantic self. She flattens under her own titanic weight, and teeth the size of fulcrete picks array her stonelike mouth.

Splayed feet and cracked legs are tucked under a flattened body.

Its lumpy membrane bulges and pulsates as it struggles to contain the squirming mass of embryonic frog-life within.

Oversized and glistening green feet pitter-patter like raindrops: quiet when alone and deafening at scale. Stirred on by a lightning-quick metabolism and shaken with thunderous pangs of hunger, he longs to grip prey in his sticky forefeet and gnaw it to bone.

Though yet young, she has gathered wits beyond a hatchling's and now also gathers tinsel trinkets to horde. By crushing polyps of coral in her mouth and rolling the bits in sticky spit, she crafts gobbets of razor-sharp shrapnel to launch at those who threaten her.

Though yet young, she has gathered wits beyond a hatchling's and now also gathers weapons for better hunting. By breaking a chunk of coral along its shear lines and chewing it down, she shapes the debris into a fragile but deadly edge.

This svardym has done what so few others have: she's aged. Wart-brained and weightier than her kin, she roams the country with her underlings, cloak-swathed, looking for prey vulnerable to her psychal deviations.

Fat was shorn from her spindle-limbs on the psychic lathe. The irises of her eyes are patterned on shapes that cannot be drawn in the geometries of the natural world, and she wears a blindfold to guard their secrets. Her weapon is immaterial but inseparable; it was spun from the same thoughtstuff as her ego. Around her neck she wears the ornamental ruff; her mastery of combat has given her access to a sight older than sight.

He flickers behind his marble coat, synchronously inhabiting this dimension while stalking the dreamy corridors of his own chimeric world.

Space and time rattle off their hinges and tear your perception apart. Through the new crosshatch of consciousness, sound only comes through in waves, the sheen of chrome explodes in supernova, and you slowly become aware of the furrowed volume of air around the shape of a monstrous pyramid.

Crushing metal arms and a pendulum gait put into motion the idea that knuckle-walking was in iteration between life and machine. Artifical cheek pads blow to terrifying size around her chrome-bang head, and her facescreen emotes in the key of power.

Particles spin in the molecular orrery of its engine and whir against its chrome-plated chassis. Life-lint powders the inside of its elliptical cannon.

Anchor shanks wet with a nameless slick do a stubborn glomming onto the ground. A saucer rife with nubs bends upward, and sitting inside it, a steamy globe gurgles sounds of the other-world. There are processes at work on those moist and inner clouds, but their rules are locked beyond knowledge.

Its shanks have stilled after the dream-quiver; the saucer slags, and the globe steams with the heat of imagined life.

A troika of monstrous, gleaming wheels orbit a center sphere of xenon clouds and gallium lightning. The spokes are laminated crysteel bled of their emerald imperfections, and the rims are milky epithelium -- a single iris stretched to the topology of a torus -- and checkered on the underside with pupils. Its movement traces the carpentry of worlds.

Vast diaphanous wings painted in the furcate patterns of fractalized geometry bat the air.

Grand white lips hang from her hooded and overly jawed face in the asymmetry of disappointment. Her brow crunches the softness out of her old, color-sucked eyes. She looks at her grand newchildren with a mixture of sharp fondness and disgust. To her, they are small puppets; their limbs must be curled around their joints with loving precision, or they are splayed open by their own wills, useless and broken.

His stomach is greasy and bloated from the curdled hemolymph, and his limbs are shrunken and folded. He is the vessel of the metamorphic numen now; the scars of his scrambled-egg genome underwrite his slumping body like bright scabs.

In its infancy, rock streamed through the planet in plumes of magma, spilled into hushed caverns, and quickened pools of protoplasm out of its stilled inertia. Plates slipped and matter was crushed, pressurized. Later, as entropy bore cracks into the crust, sticky lifethings fused to the rock and scuttled forth. In geological terms they are tiny things, but you insist that scale is the wrong one.

A quad of machine presses were ripped from the vaulted roofs of their underearth mills and welded to the casket of an earth-mover. Two  antennae touch the ever-stream of data in the dead air, and a spray of red light widens out a half-lidded eye.

Chrome sheets and shapes were torn off their welded joints and piled in a giant heap of scrap.

A ternion of transformations are given sharp shape against the fuzzy physics of earth-time. The triangle is inert and of an algebraic substance, but stillness slides off its colorless arms; objects around it are forced into sets unfamiliar.

Pointy and expressive scutes range across the broad back as a mapmade mosaic. The topography of an other-place is rendered in interdimensional keratin.

An avalanche of salt off a pretender dune reveals something out of the late world's aching dream: a living iodine grotto, nurtured to its implausible size by the vast and buoyant waveplain of Moghra'yi. A rain curtain of glass streams across the inflow of its filter feed, and behind, the ingested planet is laid in pulverized tracts.

Colossal rings of spongy wormbody are deflated and still. Sword-sized bristles scrape the earth.

A full-scale continental shelf of half-calcified, star-orchid body mass creeps over the earth, sending stone, chrome, wood, and brass to quivers. Hundreds of thousands of underspines convey its quincunx of cyclopean arms into motion, and a delta of subducting stomach muscle sticks and subsumes matter into its somatic star-bounds. In its wake an arcology of disarranged world-fragments is raised.

Horse hair carpets his beautiful brawn like white rain on the Pale Sea, and then it's battered by streamers of magenta mane. That and his tail are pennants of a Lost and Never kingdom. Ofer the head a dream is promised: bone races itself to a nothing-point and is sheathed by Time's breath in the keratin of glitter.

A white shape slumps like a deserted hill-city. Its purple pennants are still.

Dusky petals lean toward an inner point of harmony and form a beautiful flower cup. Light drips off the boundary of its influence and seeps into the void.

Particles pop on a glassy placenta separating the disordered world from a great inner dome of even vaster disorder. It moves in a quantized foxtrot, quivering across the boundary of local spacetime and only settling somewhere when entanglement demands it.

A hominid-suit of chrome is junctured together from parts across the layer cake of time: balance struts hammered off the crushed star blimp, mainshaft springs torn from buoyed chapels, actuators hewed from the machine hearts of city centers, intakes blown of molten lamp glass. One arm ends in a giant blade, machined to final form at the Eater presses that stamp out artworks in the forever mode.

A hominid-suit of chrome is junctured together from parts across the layer cake of time: balance struts hammered off the crushed star blimp, mainshaft springs torn from buoyed chapels, actuators hewed from the machine hearts of city centers, intakes blown of molten lamp glass. A proton rod capitals each shoulder, chipped to the Z radius in the mirrorshops of lower earth.

A godsuit of chrome shines in the baptism bloodoil of the Great Cistern, where even standing at the lowest basin it broke the cavern rafters. Uuflax braids cinctured with ties of offworld goldleaf spill from the crown radar and over its deltoid chassis. Every piece of its glass and chrome was sourced from the arcological heart, encased in resin, pullchained up and hotbrushed in the temple foundry. The entry hatch is hung with a sigil rug of the pilot, who climbed in to anchor here years ago and communes now with the Godhead.

A hot cage of thermonuclear torrent is trussed with semiconductors. There are indentations in the casing for assisted transport.

Oil smears and arc burns stripe the flesh that peeks out from under the frustum of her habit, and the tools belted to her waistline put a sag in her breeches. She is guided by the stitch of her order's diasporic emblem, set with a magnetic needle, and pointing her toward the wild gardens beyond the wall.

Giant waveform half-shells of calcium are dusted with moss and algae. They lie at an open, welcoming angle, and the portal muscle at their center palpitates with spatiotemporal regularity.

Swathing the frail frame of this waif is the habit of her order: grey matter robes and a blindfold over her eyes.

A weapon is mounted on the splayed legs of an automated tripod.

Three steel barrels fit together into an arc-edged triangle of luminous ritualism. They sit on a servo-articulated base mount.

His hunched back is sown with tufts of white fur and needle quills. The nose at the end of his bear-snout is dark and wet. Long, slender, triple-jointed fingers sprout from his pudgey paws and flutter with composed precision.

Their leafy lobes flush and dampen with liquid.

A creature of immensity mounts the upper eyeline. The monstrous slumping head is moted with warts and freckles, and a soaking wattle rains putrid sauce on the floor. Years of slouching under pipeworks has smashed his diacalyptus spine, and the sponginess of matter has left him boiling and sick from his surroundings. Finally, irisdual light churning under his tx-glass skin is filtered to a sickening hue and radiates out of body in lituus spirals.

A creature of immensity mounts the upper eyeline. Leather trapezii swell with the pump of overfurcate capillaries, vapor attaches to their starless nares, and long hand-feet fork into a hundred digits each. Over the raw humps of their body, even the deadest of lifegrowth (hair, nails) is quickened to act and writhes like startled maggots. Finally, irisdual light churning under their tx-glass skin is filtered to a viscus hue and radiates out of body in lituus spirals.

A creature of immensity mounts the upper eyeline. Star gas boils off their coral spines, and a tail blown to fin width by the selection pressures of water waves around the unit circle. A cloud of sea fungi suffocate and pop on their vast sucking gills, and -- finally -- irisdual light churning under their tx-glass skin is filtered to an auroral hue and radiates out of body in lituus spirals.

A creature of immensity mounts the upper eyeline. Quantized force has shaped her behemoth muzzle to an uncanny square-shape, and tresses of potential energy wash her withers to an unmeaning blur. Beneath her slumping barrel, elephantine knees are locked at right angles. Finally, irisdual light churning under her tx-glass skin is filtered to a polar hue and radiates out of body in lituus spirals.

A creature of immensity mounts the upper eyeline. Her throat corded like the tree-hugged Svy honks the Coronach of Numbers out a monadic bill. The feathers of her gigantic kite train iridesce in Spindle glitter and cohere to a vexing picture of universal wrongness. Finally, irisdual light churning under her tx-glass skin is filtered to a dazzling hue and radiates out of body in lituus spirals.

A creature of immensity mounts the upper eyeline. Tunnel-steeled rings of extruded wormgut belch shale dust like cavern rain, and a colony of starspines grow across its sloping world-back. In a wreath around its pitting mouth, a hundredish eyes have grown to drink every photon out the jeweled and sunless haunts of yesterearth. Finally, irisdual light churning under its tx-glass skin is filtered to a smoke and citrine hue and radiates out of body in lituus spirals.

Fine crushed herbs dust the old man's pestle knuckles.

Red welts dot his skin where the soldering iron nipped it. Rings of ash stain his apron, and his vest pockets sprout stem-thin rods of glass, strands of wire, and metal rivets.

His spectacles are fogged and his hands are stained with ink.

Bees flutter around the brim of his hat, pulled low over his sweaty brow. His apron is stained with glistening drops of honey.

He kneads the remnants of jams and paste against his smock. Clipped yuckwheat stems unwittingly decorate his grey locks. He smells like a childhood meal.

Grape-stained teeth fill his grinning mouth. He sings the praises of his family's vintage.

Sweat-stained sleeves bellow through a leather apron. He turns an awl around his fingers.

He's woven a leather chin strap between his fingers. Pelts of a dozen animals hang from his shoulder.

Glove tranks are fastened to the back of her hands with loose thread. She bites a needle for safekeeping.

Pastes and jams of various colors smear her apron like a painter's palette. Flour dusts her broad, dough-kneading knuckles.

Wire, twine, and thread tangle from spools strapped to his vest. He sports a ruffled cloak of unknown fashion.

Tongs clip between her soot-seared apron and the barrel of her chest. She clasps a swivel knife and hammer for working leather and metal.

A crushed hat brim mantles his eyes and a leather holster rides his shoulder. He rolls a lead slug over his leathery knuckles.

His fingers are stained with soot, the devil's ink. Scars criss-cross their way up his arms.

Her apron is damp with the sap of a thousand trees. Her lips are painted in watercolor. She wrings ichor from her hair.

A telescopic monocle is affixed to her eye, and she squints permanently. She twirls a delicate stone in appraisal.

Scars on his hands indicate where the grinding wheel gluttonously sheared through stone and feasted on chips of flesh.

Spectacles rest on her pointy nose. Her nails are caked with graphite, and reams of graph paper are splayed across her desks.

Orbed goggles smeared with blood impart an insectoid aspect to his face. His apron is stained with a rainbow of pinks, tans, and nickel -- the palette of machine and folk guts -- and spare wire shoots from his sleeves like cuffs.

The crab farmer slouches in the heat. A beaten, leather hat is pulled low over her eyes and sweat glistens on the scruffs of hair on her cheeks. Her hands are caked in mud and salt.

The leech farmer slouches in the heat. A beaten, leather hat is pulled low over his eyes and sweat glistens on the scruffs of hair on his cheeks. His hands are caked in mud, blood, and salt.

The cat herder slouches in the heat. A beaten, leather hat is pulled low over his eyes and sweat glistens on the scruffs of hair on his cheeks. His hands are caked in mud, salt, and glittering optic-fiber dust.

The amoeba farmer slouches in the heat. A beaten, leather hat is pulled low over his eyes and sweat glistens on the scruffs of hair on his cheeks. His hands are caked in mud, slime, and salt.

The snail farmer slouches in the heat. A beaten, leather hat is pulled low over his eyes and sweat glistens on the scruffs of hair on his cheeks. His hands are caked in mud, mucus, and salt.

The goat herder slouches in the heat. A beaten, leather hat is pulled low over her eyes and sweat glistens on the scruffs of hair on her cheeks. Her hands are caked in mud and salt.

The beetle farmer slouches in the heat. A beaten, leather hat is pulled low over his eyes and sweat glistens on the scruffs of hair on his cheeks. His hands are caked in mud and salt.

A warm smile spreads over an old face freckled by time and a million crumbs of salt. He shrinks under a hunched back and drums the ground beneath him with a short and barb-crowned tail. A second pair of arms rise over the slump of his shoulders, where hands meet and fingers lace to form another face, this one vacant and prehistoric, no mouth and eyes desert-white.

Sharp jade eyes are crow-worn to late middle age and her lips are scarred with gas burns. Climbing over her back and neck are the jeweled segments of a great spiral tail and stinger; a bead of smoking gut juice gleams on the tip.

His mushroom cloud of beard hair is powdered with all the abrasions of the trash sea: white lime, red iron, gold filament, opalescent shavings of the plastiglomerate. Chrome joints and pieces of scrap crystal are hooked to pockets lining his torso, and one of his bushy eyebrows is perpetually cocked, though whether that's a symptom of an insatiable curiosity or forehead mutation is unknown.

One star-ribboned night, a ray cat crossed the marshy loam and wandered into Joppa. The watervine farmers, wakened by the joyful cries of a small girl, gathered around to revel at the favorable omen and extol the generosity of the Beetle Moon. Since then, Ctesiphus has spent his days curled under the shade of brinestalk huts and sauntering over dirt paths. So long as he's approached with care, he welcomes the hands of friends and strangers alike.

phosphorescent

He is a wind-carved man with the posture of a vinereaper; his spine is bent to point the bright turquoise of his eyes at the tilling angle, his hips are pushed odd-forward with the slumping ease of a stance much more relaxed than his. If it weren't for the salt on his brow and the scarred knuckles, he would seem a marble Saad perched under a crumbling tomb.

Her kufiya has been cut and resewn to a cowl, and she has tailored a vinewafer sack to approximate the slate habit of the chromaic people. A sheaf of watervine bundled in copper wire is slung on her hip, and she rubs a salt-nailed thumb over a talisman of cracked circuitboard.

His kufiya has been cut and resewn to a cowl, and he has tailored an apple sack to approximate the slate habit of the chromaic people. A herding crook sheathed in copper wire is slung on his hip, and he rubs a salt-nailed thumb over a talisman of cracked circuitboard.

A torn kufiya has been cut and resewn to a cowl, and he has tailored a knapsack to approximate the slate habit of the chromaic people. A human bone sheathed in copper wire is slung on his hip, and he rubs a salt-nailed thumb over a talisman of cracked circuitboard.

His kufiya has been cut and resewn to a cowl, and he has tailored a tattered banner to approximate the slate habit of the chromaic people. A bronze dagger sheathed in copper wire is slung on his hip, and he rubs a salt-nailed thumb over a talisman of cracked circuitboard.

Big Yrame shifts her weight between hind and forelegs. She shakes a storm of rust dander from the tines of her great horns, and she blows a halo of freezing air from her rime-veined hands.

A leaf disc gleams through luminous veins, flashing neon in advertisement. Arrayed across their damp pad is a trove of wares.

The Onias is robed in flowing machinic regalia. He is the voice of Shekhinah, and so he wields the charm of words to give depth cues on the shape of the Kasaphescence, and repeats the story of the Fathers who transited Her from the ideal to the material. As crownhead of the white dune see, he leads the high priests in tracing the circuit diagrams of the second Canticles, and moderates their hermeneutic divisions.

There's a saying among the vintners who hoist their sails toward the Stilt. 'One rose is fair; five is death.' Indeed, when a single shawl swathes her face and the Esthers are one, there is peace beneath the Stilt. But when she's joined by her sisters, and scarlet ribbons thrash in the desert air, there is only blood and justice.

There is little more to the slight deerkin than a bundle of spindly limbs, patchy pale-green fur, and tooth-white skin. Despite being one of the dune's more delicate creatures, they perch on their hooves with easy composure.

Folds of coarse-weave physician's cloth hang off his lissome frame like a gunslinger's shawl, and the crinkled brim of an old hat blots the sun and starlight.

Shem has augmented their body beyond the chromeling's basic form by welding on a dissymmetric ruffled coat of scrap metal. It's too big and grandiose for their little figure, but Shem shuffles about confidently, as if they expect to grow into it. 

He stands with tremendous import and stillness, as if upon some hidden but vital vertex of the enclave.

In Barathrum's name, he's conferred onto himself the tonsure of stewardship and shorn the hair from his scalp. His snout narrows in proportion to the tight corridors around him. His robe is impeccably clean. Waydroids beep and whir at him obediently as they scuffle past.

She's an opal in the monochrome.

Her hair is a quasar of red ochre and indigo in the blanched light of the workshop. Her cartilage is pierced by polyhedral rings that spin in antinomy to the cave's simple geometry. Beneath the quills her skin is decorated in furcate lines, fantastic elaborations on the patterns of discarded circuitboards. She's surrounded by apparatuses of her own creation. Through the harmony of those machines, she cuts a swath through the entropic brine that sizzles around her in a loudening chorus.

The absurd greebling of age has caused an extra patch of quills to grow where every one quillroot had been, so the hunching back of the eldest arch bear is now meadowed in white needles of every direction and length. He seems a world in one; a spine crumpled by a chiliad of years still holds a posture of thereness and knowing. Interred beneath scarps of wrinkled skin, his eyes smolder to the horizon like dying suns.

A giant is carpentered from large-scale scrap towed from the trash sea. Tailstock legs meet a great flange torso at shimmed hips, piston arms break at wye pipe shoulders, and a bent pressing plate soldered with radio antennae delivers an empty stare.

Extra long and slender fingers poke the micrometer lengths necessary to adjust a sight lens or set the oscillator on a vibrohilt. He turns his attention to you as you approach, to watch and read your speech.

His face is small and shorn of all fur, and a gleaming silver rondure adorns his right ear. All his quills are trimmed to impeccable precision.

The big urshiib is dusted with spice and wet with honeyed grease, and he smells of a melange: hot mushroom, cloying ink, saffron, and cooked tongue.

Streaks of grey head-hair and crunched skin around her eyes point to Hortensa's right-sitting point on life's timeline, but her frame remains straight, her hands remain dexterous, and her muscles are full of figure and responsive. Her bearing is sharp and unsoftened with age; her lips are pursed in the tension of rational thought. But she is comfortable; her movements are unrushed. There are hints of joy and warmth in her face; they shine through the dense layers of tissue grown out of careful routine.

The soft urshiib's Pale Sea eyes achieve a sort of focal paradox. They appear to focus both impossibly close, on the screws and fasteners she sorts ahead of her, and impossibly far, on the horizon of attainable thought. Her eyelids rest low with the weariness of both tasks.

Their face is tender, clean, and dotted with tiny furs. Their head-hair is gelatinized and shaped into a sharp rectangle. Their eyes are light and wide. Weird clothes hang about their narrow frame, and their fingers fidget in patterned asynchronicity. Occasionally they beam a grin and freeze their motion before resuming as if nothing happened.

A proud and parted mane of bristles frames a wide grin. Tied with thread to several of them are thumb-bells meant to draw the attention of customers.

White fur and skin-crimps hatch from the corners of his shy eyes. He runs a spare bolt over his knuckles, ready to fix a wanting chromeling for the thousandth and first time rather than chat with another person.

The climbing vine curls tight about a witchwood stake. A noggin of knotted tendrils bounces to and fro, keeping time with the movement of nearby creatures and objects. Its ears perk at the sound of langauge, and it flicks leaves against its stake to mimic phrases it heard uttered centuries ago.

Her proud stance and the burning intensity of her eyes set her apart from her cervidian kinfolk. Those sharp jade gems are softened by the powdered red fur of her cheeks, and her split philtrum is the only deviation from the narrowing neutral lines of her lips. Save for her leather cuffs, nothing she wears is of hindren make.

The lanky deerfolk's thin frame is bent in a shy hunch. But her bright eyes shine like emeralds with insight and aggressive curiosity, and slender fingers flick to the complex rhythms of the weald.

She's so small as to appear to be faundren, but a closer look at her tense shoulders and calculating eyes reveal her as a fully-grown runt. She wears her hair in a pair of buns tied tight as her nerves. Her little hands, curled and anxious, are covered with the signature burns and cuts of an amateur tinker.

Icy vapor trails from her hands, up her foreign-made tunic, and mists her dark, shoulder-length hair. What most distinguishes her among her hindren kin, however, is the warm smile she flashes at everyone, even intruders to the weald.

All lithe muscle and hard vigilance, Neelahind becomes her occupation as the warden of Bey Lah. She blooms to fill the faulds of her armor, but the attentive eye that matches hers catches sight of a secret truth: inside the stout and sturdy body of the warrior hides a scared and flustered faundren.

Time has put creases in her ears and a deep furrow in her throat. The sharp voice thus produced starts and stops the motion of life in the meadow. The arc of tradition has named her Hindriarch, inscribed in the garland cut of her hair, and the downslope of time has locked her in the minds of faundren as Grand-Doe. To all in Bey Lah, she is the sovereign law.

I met a cadre of mopango folk,
who told me tales of an ancient oak,
who stood and ruled for a century.
She towered tall over those below.
She cast shade down so they wouldn't grow,
but they all believed it was meant to be.

But when hot sky-fire broke tradition,
she found herself in no position,
To draw up any new decree.

-- Willow Shakesprig's 'Macoun', Act V, scene iii

Braids of thick neck muscle follow the leylines of fur on his scowling face. He clutches his weapon in hard embrace, and he paints a sneer with his lip to suggest how enamored he is with his role as rank thug.

A slight and trim faundren narrows his Spindle-blue eyes. Like the other younglings, his face is bright with burning curiosity. Unlike theirs, though, his is tempered by poise and honed to a dagger's point by a startlingly precocious discipline.

A toga wraps his hulking, bright-fur frame, and a broad brim shades his wise and wideset eyes. A sedentary life has sapped some of his ape strength: burly shoulders slouch their weight onto a walking stick, a belly swells the linen around his waist, and plump, sloping cheeks rim a warm and welcoming grin.

Beneath a mane of coarse hair, Warden Indrix's lips move without issuing forth any sound, perhaps in the formation of a litany invoked in the name of the vengeful god he serves. The coarse hair grows in an uninterrupted mass down his torso, that of a human but broader and more taut with muscle than any man's, disappearing only behind the sash of his kilt. But for Mayor Nuntu and the warden himself, no one knows the circumstances of Indrix's estrangement from his kin, for no one dares mention it lest they draw the warden's ire. One of his great curling horns has been cleanly cloven from his head, however. That same horn along with several others hang from a belt slung low about Indrix's hips, giving him the distinction of being the only warrior to bear his own appendage as a trophy.

Someone is swaddled in the fleece of life and death: grass, fern, and moss grow on or are the svelte figure's clothes, and mushroom caps are the buttons and fasteners. A liripipe of needlepoint ivy curtains their face, hornholds round their waist, and peeking through the canopied shoulder are the carved hilts of sword twins.

Yurl, a sentient cucumber vine, puts their roots down in a squat clay pot on the floor of their hut. Myriad wares rest on oaken shelves throughout the room, and with their tendrils Yurl exhibits them to interested customers by crawling along an iron trellis. You notice that Yurl creeps toward products almost before you think of them; the gift of telepathy affords the sprightly vine a distinct advantage as a chandler.

They are clearly as nimble as other woodsprogs, but they bear the telltale marks of age and hurt at the edges. The fur about their sea-wide eyes is white now and threads the crow lines on their face. A patch of shoulder rises skinbare and pebbled with the memory of fire and steam. Finally, their apron, caked with ingredient viscera, clatters with ladles and tankards of carved chitin.

Bright glints in the rapture-stapled eyes of an anemic water merchant give you sudden pause. He is appareled in a patchwork of cloak shreds, and despite the lake of sweat settled on the oily sediment of his skin, his mouth is parched in fissures after days of refusing to drink the very life water he peddles. Improbably, his countenance still manages a hue of glee, glistening in the fire of a secret unshared.

Mamon stands nearly a head taller than his kin and broader at the shoulders. Great tufts of blood-matted hair, some of which is braided, tassel out from his head and chin, and a tattered, crimson headdress hangs from one of his colossal horns. In long swaths on his bare chest the fur is scorched and the skin flayed. He wears a sarong wrapped about his waist, its wool fibers sodden with a foul, inky liquid. His face is a vision of madness, at once the countenance of a rapturous crone and a child in fright.

You stand not at the foot of a wintry knoll but beneath a mountain of muscle, swathed in blanched fur, that must be nature's crowning jewel. Cast from the mold of the great apes (or perhaps the exemplar from which those apes were molded), the living god differs only in that He bears not two but six arms, each of which might be the fleeced bole of an ancient yew. His fists are of proportions that suggest the might with which hoary gods beat the mountains into shape when the earth was young. However, His aspect bears not a shred of that divine fury; He doesn't rage but instead sits in contemplation of eons.

A slug has grown too large for its anatomy to know what to do. Bubbles of stinking broth pop over breathing pores the size of elbows, and a fifth phase of trashlike matter leaks out its crusty mantle and down the sharp keel of its back. Where nature had the decency to end the body of the common slug in a muscular foot, Slog's tail is instead a sphincter-choked bilge hose that it uses to spew foul waterfunk about its surroundings.

Wet rings of shuddering muscle shrink and spew body broth in peristaltic waves.

Slimy rings of spongy wormbody are deflated and still. Little bristles scrape the earth.

Let the manes put off their terror, let them put off their aqueous bodies with fire.
      Let them draw together the bones of the metal.
      Selvaggia, Guiscarda, Mandetta,
      Rain flakes of gold on the water
      Azure and flaking silver of water,
      Pallor of silver, pale lustre of Latona,
      By these, from the malevolence of the dew
      Guard this alembic.
      Elain, Tireis, Allodetta
      Quiet this metal.
      -Ezra Pound

A whole man is formed of skinstuff that mirrors the subsurface scattering and rivulet imperfections of sculpted marble. He is white and pink and blushing with the sanguinity of moonlight filtered through a sieve of monofilament chrome. Eyes drawn to a lasting point, he casts a furious gaze on a world made defamiliar.

Years of proximity to the baetyl have blanched the antipriest's irises to chrome. A circuit diagram snakes its way across his body in the mixed media of robe embroidery and skin rime. Unlike the lyrical circuit batches in the second Canticles, this one is a fractal elaboration of itself, blooming under the effect of heretical speciation due to the isolation of the Rock.

A lens of glass has crusted over the smooth stone where the heat of sacred math burned the air then cooled in Q.E.D. Under that dermis and the meteoritic layer, an electric heart grinds on the field of magnets at the earth's core and radiates a shower of sparks. This one emits a chromesoft purr.

Asphodel (called the Lovely) turns their tipping anthers at seductive angles. All the bright golds of the harvest sun and musa peel are garnishes to the frail beauty of xyr petal. Xe claims the aesthetic lineage of Hegelrut, and from that argument flowers xyr claim to Omonporch and the entire Great Shade of the grove.

Flower buds cluster in sixes across their time-maimed topaz bark and are ringed by glossy green leaves. They shoot up tall in defiance of millenia of wall shade, but their crown sags with weary softness, and their exposed roots trace the outline of a grassy salon. The grove's oldest tree, called the Haddas, welcomes you to their shadow.

Stuck to their rind of mirrored chrome sequins are two separate ecologies: the crispy deadgrowths of the inner Tomb and the verdurous molt of grove life. As the years spin by and the colossus adjusts to the sun-drenched outer world, the latter consumes the former.

Sharp leaves burst forth from a decorative pot like a geyser of verdure. They flit as with irritation and offense at every stimulus, an assumption that might seem like an overread if it weren't for the strong telepathic halo of frustration radiating from xyr leafy form.

A man in the threadbare clothes of a tattered knight stands as if hewn from the trunk of a tree. Gnarled hands grip with more force than is needed for the task of standing at an unasked vigil.

Spools of hair are bunched under the frustum of her habit, her round cheeks are smeared with polyurethane and Spindle dust, and her face is pulled low by the violence of her square jaw. Long, muscular forearms are tensed by the repeated pinching motion of tool manipulation. Her eyes are ultra keen and shine bright cyan, and her vision smoothly segues between her work and her surroundings.

Is it a coincidence that the knotted, erumpent throng of organ that is Pax Klanq is shaped in the vague form of a humanoid, or is the prodigy fungus welcoming their extradimensional anthropoid visitors with a warm gesture? In either case, their splendid orange cap looks like a fancy hat. The semblance ends there, however; in place of a face, there's only a trio of undulating tentacles.

At the edges of your field of vision, more tentacles writhe over tools, books, circuitboards, frog cadavers, and saltwater pearls. You realize just how many things Klanq does at once, and you wonder at Nature's decision to bestow peak organic wit to a fungus.

Geometry is stressed under the gelatin alp, which erupts from the smooth planes of its surroundings in disgusting triumph of size. Its k membranous faces, once taut by the pressurization of symmetry, now follow a sagging curve toward the wet core, and through the blurry placentae shines a museum of historical objects from across the numbered ages. Are those the bones of a pig? Is that a bronze bell? Inside the bright-slick sac, earth-remnants from across time are joined to one space, and k-Goninon sloshes in hunger.

Chrome bunches in cloth-like furrows across a metal tunic that drapes across their lanky, anxious, pinion-limbs. A large metal cask -- their head -- sits atop their too-frail undercarriage, and a gleaming glass eye shines at you in several shades of tinted light. They seem on the verge of apologizing.

A piece of scrap was shed or peeled off a machine fossil.

Three digitigrade skinshine legs are weighed down by the aura of a floating metal carapace, suspended across three bands in quantum magnetic tension. Prehensile braids of cordage spill from its apertures (ending in manic and electric eyes), and the air around it purrs in the audio multitexture of gold.

Arches of burnished shell huddle together as a shy metal pill bug. It inches along on brush-shaped appendages, and the only way to tell for sure which way it faces is the cross of light athwart its front plate.

There is no mouth here, and yet it screams: a stringy and sharp whine too high-pitched for ears. Unalgebraic points of wickedness sheet its entire serpent bod, and slit eyes spy a torturous path forward.

Piers of stillborn glass convey the walking thing forward with grace and dumb purpose. An astral spike of head backstabs the drift wind.

Ey squats in a soft halo of cool light that emanates directly from the plates of eir carapace armor and the fur between. Every movement is accompanied by sibilant music as those plates slide over one another, whispering a wordless prayer.
          
This one tugs on eir molly netting, ever checking on the security of its contents.

Ey squats in a soft halo of cool light that emanates directly from the plates of eir carapace armor and the fur between. Every movement is accompanied by sibilant music as those plates slide over one another, whispering a wordless prayer.
          
This one moves little and resembles a phosphorescent rock.

Ey squats in a soft halo of cool light that emanates directly from the plates of eir carapace armor and the fur between. Every movement is accompanied by sibilant music as those plates slide over one another, whispering a wordless prayer.
          
This one is traced by a long tail and wriggles in calm habit.

Ey squats in a soft halo of cool light that emanates directly from the plates of eir carapace armor and the fur between. Every movement is accompanied by sibilant music as those plates slide over one another, whispering a wordless prayer.
          
This one is jeweled in the eroded scrap of the Tomb.

Three steel barrels fit together into an arc-edged triangle of luminous ritualism. They sit on a servo-articulated base mount. Above, a pair of separately-articulated cameras swivel with somewhat more life than one might typically expect from an automated weapon.

Pouches of Tomb scrap and cookstuff are spread and hung from this mopango's carapace. Eir countenance is full of familial care and welcoming.

Ey glows softer than other mopango, bioluminescencing in pale and gentle hues that disguise em against the blanched walls of fossilized life.

Damp clothes of the shomerim habit, a hoiche, a tallit, and a robe, drape over air as if they swathe a person's figure. Rain drops from another world patter on the bosks of ribboned thread, transforming from tense spheres of selfhood to diffuse moisture on the fibrous loam. Old life is absorbed by the ageless linen, wrung out by an invisible hand, and the cycle repeats itself.

Moist, patterned skin sloughs around a thousand bubble warts, and a horn-crown rounds his enormous head thirteen span high. On his malachine face, two fleece-like lids droop to couch ireful eyes of amber. A guttural boom in the contrabass spectrum drums out of his vocal sac, vibrating the warty webbing on his overgrown toes. He is a chiliad-chewed, mountainous wad of spite.

Warty skin and crooked bone were stretched out by an improbable row of centuries. The frog is now a looming, spine-skewed being. But his visage peels into an affable grin and dissolves the menace of his frame. A gigantic tongue flops out his mouth now and again to bat something off his steppeland back or muss the ground behind you.

The great frog's towering body is poised in peace and festooned like a skin temple. Her shoulders drip with soft cloth and ornaments across the gamut of value; she takes no care to arrange or separate them.

Skinny, spotted arms and legs flap in an unfolded position. His eyes bulge even further apart than other svardym, and in the center of his orbed head a warty ridge has thrusted up. The pupils of his eyes are narrowed with spirited interest.

Her big web feet slosh over the ground to convey her little frog self. Laced stripes of plastiglomerate form decorative rings through her nostrils and around her eyelids.

From a hydroponic planting tray dusted with decorative gravel, a column of sea grapes rises, twists, and bunches into the approximate shape of a woman. Though her bubbly green strands are but a loose imitation of the flesh of limbs and digits, she carries herself with humanlike ease and manages to vocalize in a reedy but audible tone.

He is a mudrock in the kaleidoscope. His salt-pocked skin, slouching spine, and dour expression are imported from the farmsteading reaches of western Qud, buh he stands draped in the bright colors of his brilliant eastborn flock.

Draped in a heavy coat of scrap, wearing a beastly mask, and wielding a hand-cranked wheel-fiddle, they look more the part of a pageantry player than a village's defender. Up close, however, you glimpse the hilt of their brand, the butt of their gun, and the burnished black aegis of unmarked fullerite that they employ. Eyes of burnished azzurum peek through the sockets of their beaked mask, suggesting the very threat their costume was meant to annul.

From a distance, the slynth could be mistaken for a human wearing a wide-brimmed, lanterned hat, but he is no human and his hat is no vestment. This one crooks with a small hunch earned from many hours of reading over many years. He reels with the anxious air of a being waiting for something unknown.

Mirrored ribbons in deep and bold colors run the manifold inside the crystal chime. They ring in sonorous and commanding tones.

Smooth crystal has been rent by trauma and left open in sharpened grief. Inside, billowing clouds of melancholy swell in gaseous tides.

Emotion and purpose are concentrated in sharp and bright points. They ring and spin in defiance of the raw inertia at work in the psychic ether.

Like malachine it crusts in the mammillary habit and glows with leafy warmth. Its chimes are high and choral; it harmonizes with the dream wrens and wind.

Hot ash and glitter radiate impossible colors in the arteries of the small chime, and dust swirls around its psychomagnetic orbit. It warbles in the frequency of dreams.

A million etches across the parted leaf-chime speak the sense of touch. A sap-like substance drips off the crystal tip and attenuates his vibrations to the bass range.

A crystal sponge-chime shivers in acicular panic. Sharp tones ring off their needle points and shatter in zeniths.

Stems lace and tangle on each other to effloresce as a vegetative body-maze. Where they swaddle the crystal trellis of Chavvah's branch, they burn with a pinkish tint. The leafy mass on the counterside of xyr body jingles with white berries and a stock of rare goods.

Smooth crystal glitters with soft light and renewed purpose across her eight facets. Prism-limbs shatter out of her torso and narrow each to a pentacle of sharp points, and a thrum beats at the air around the walking crystal being. The chime becomes.

Dimensional travels have altered the waifhood of this Sightless meyvn into something new. Where rattle-thin bones poke the skin of their lesser kin, a strange metallic fat obtains on their starburnt flesh. Instead of the novice or disciple's splotchy baldness on the scalp, a strange fungus from the outer reaches grows as a new type of hair and peaks out the darkness of their cowl. Their blindfold remains, though it spins out in lateral ribbons and hangs with unearthly weight.

Bump, scars, and ridges crisscross the monstrous waveform shell from where the boundaries of dimensions ground against the interstitial space. A soft organ-thing lies inside, lit by the glimmers of Old Light flashing off the all-color nacre. Grooves across the shell mantle billow with the dust of ontoxanthellae, cross-dimensional symbiotes. Arrayed aside them are articles of other places, a pan-dimensional inventory stocked by an entropic broker.

A severe hindren woman wears a spotless white tabard with long tails tailored to drape across her longish back. Dappled flanks are arrayed in saddlebags heavy with esoteric gadgetry, and a bluish-white crust grows across her face, rendering her gimlet stare all the more striking.

Dust powders the puzzling device.

Dust powders the gigantic device.

Light gleams off the edging of a small curio.

Tubes of unknown purpose splay at welded joints.

A sitting object of vacant intent catches dust and offlight.

Knobs and rivets crisscross the inscrutable machine.

A strange substance fills a channel of glass.

An unknown organ bleats with the desperation of life.

An unfamiliar tendril of green in leaf-sheath circles itself.

Blemishes cross the short barrel of an unidentified gun.

Blemishes cross the long barrel of an unidentified gun.

Smokescar blackens the iron sight and stretches down the big gun's main channel.

Stretch wire connects the nocks of an unidentified bow.

A cannister of blast is sheathed in undeciphered metal.

A hunk of fused material makes a beating stick.

A sharp edge tops a strange hilt.

A blade of considerable length runs through a strange hilt.

A bladed edge hangs over a finger-smudged haft.

A curved screen of bang-hard surface material is wielded by a welded grip.

A shaped cuirass of unknown origin protects the good portion of a body.

A head topper was fashioned for unknown purpose.

A false face was shaped to fashion and stitched with unknown intent.

Rounded seers are held by a strap.

Strange mitts will fit most wrists and fingers.

A rounded torc gleams for unintended eyes.

Fabric of some type was sutured to an unknown end.

A strapped sack was sewn for carrying something.

Blemishes of long use cross the surface of the footwear.

It's a vessel of well and unusual make.

Bits sleep until animated inside their rectangle coffin.

The array of strange parts are summed together as a kind of tool.

Empty air pressurizes a channel of glass.

Raw bear flesh is tinctured in its own spilled blood.

Raw pig flesh is tinctured in its own spilled blood.

Raw boar flesh is tinctured in its own spilled blood.

Raw barkbiter flesh is tinctured in its own spilled blood.

Bug muscle is heaped and plated on broken shell.

Raw goat flesh is tinctured in its own spilled blood.

Bug muscle is heaped and plated on broken exobone.

Frog leg is tinctured in its own spilled blood.

Flesh of cheek and jowl is tinged with the smell of salt.

Worm flesh is tinctured in its own spilled slick.

A mosaic of keeled scales coils like a wound rope. It's crusted with char and smells like smoke.

A four-chambered slab of wet and raw tissue slumps under its own sopping weight.

Pinches of opal black fur stick to the wet leg meat.

A triad of tonges are twined together in a fibrous twist. They gleam with a coat of saliva.

Jointed and spined legs are arrayed in a pool of bone jelly.

Enormous jointed and spined legs are arrayed in a pool of bone jelly.

A halo of smoke lifts off the calcified orb.

A paper-thin bowl of bone is etched with the bright and furcate marks of lightning.

Space is partitioned across three displacement chambers to create negative pressure around the shunting organ.

A labyrinth of nerves poke through their limpid tissue wrapper.

Ageless bone was pulverized and compacted inside the scarred intestine of a bone worm.

Aromatic dew dampens the deflated flaps of tissue and scorches the surrounding air.

Aromatic dew dampens the deflated flaps of tissue and freezes the surrounding air.

Aromatic dew dampens the deflated flaps of tissue and stings the surrounding air.

Aromatic dew dampens the deflated flaps of tissue and polarizes the surrounding air.

Aromatic dew dampens the deflated flaps of tissue and makes humid the surrounding air.

Aromatic dew dampens the deflated flaps of tissue and arrests the surrounding air.

Aromatic dew dampens the deflated flaps of tissue and obfuscates the surrounding air.

The fluted stem of tassled yonderbrush bends to a farpoint out of focus.

A little nub of cork swells with moisture. It was watered over hot weeks by a splayed frond, vested with inhuman patience, who sucked one mote of rain from a hundred-mile wind.

Earth scars brook the cinnamon bulb, warped by the pressures of soil and chrome to a shape that encodes a chiliad of ruin.

Juice drips off the bright skin sheathing the quincunx core. To eyes wet with hunger, it shines like a garnet in the vulcan salt.

A rib of fractus shoots a wet and pointy pear off its sunbloated greenery.

Beneath a cap of spread gills, the stem contours to a bursting waist. The fungus is fat on the dead of its sliver of loam.

The truffle is encrusted with a wine-colored char residue born of gases unknown to the world-surface. Deep, deep in the earth and across the Pale Sea, it was smoldered to succulence.

Rime sparkles on the lampshade cap that glows with soft biolumin.

Sight senses blur on spongent craters of a swollen coral moon. Is this the flesh of gods?

Pungent, ochre-toned petals look like an aromatic herb, but their savory flavor is closer to broth than tisane.

Bleached cyan grave moss has grown into a rare and supple clump.

Its spline is richly hued in ripeness, and Spindle glitter dots the peel.

Children cry at the crisp snip of a yuckwheat stem, as they have for hundreds of years. They bawl, and flail, and writhe from their mothers' grasps, deaf to reassurances of the plant's medical potency. Snipped and crushed, the stem tastes acidic on their tongues and their faces contort in children's agony. But they sleep better at night, so their mothers say.

Starchy dendrites were slashed from the earth and shaved down.

Light drips off the lunes' boundaries of influence and seeps into the void.

Earth-dense juice pressures the berry skin into a perfect and light-curving sphere. Inside, a pip encodes a millionfold instruction set for the shape of shapes.

Millennia of chymified metropolis that's fed the grass-coral-fungi hybrid shadow-forking in its guts are resorbed inside the seed coat of an eco wad.

It's a choice cut of laminated sponge. It jiggles to the touch.

A shard of glass shines on sharp edges, its crack patterns characteristic of geologic pressure-tempering.

Starbright grass peaked at a local maximum of meaning and then was cut and bundled.

A stalk of red celery is floured in the abraded dust of centuries.

The heart of the jilted lover burns under embered petals, pinched to anguish in citrine anthers and laid on a weeping bed of sepal jade.

Seasoning the minced meat that's trapped under the crust is a smidge of yyffur dust, shaved from the stalk of the eponymous mushroom and finely ground. The whole mushroom is much too powerful for a mammalian psyche (consuming one would obliterate the ego in mere moments), but a smidge of dust on a tasty pie can remind one of one's place in the cosmos.

A long and warted neck of mint green was fruited on a fertile vine and picked crisp.

Thin and ancient paper, a palimpsest of grease, wraps the crisp saddle of fried wafer. Seven strata of congealed nectar fill the crispy cleft.

Psychal energy hovers near the zero-point as soft fuzz but peaks in the tetrahedral habit. This crystal was cracked off a root-bouquet before the system could develop chime-sentience. It vibrates with nascent thought and feeling.

Cheesecloth sticks to the greasy faces of a pigwrought cuboid. For two years microbes have colonized its faces, ripening it to high taste.

Smooth and sunstriped shells insulate the explosive treeshoot to come.

Sweet starapples were mashed, set over an open flame, left out to cool, and jarred for later use. Bits of stringy pulp lay suspended in the fruity aether.

The spiny fruit of fracti were mashed, set over an open flame, left out to cool, and jarred for later use. Bits of spiny pulp lay suspended in the fruity aether.

Bunched wafers reaped from the moisture-sucking watervine plant and bound by twine.

Plucked from the dirt, they live their new lives wading in the brine.

Wrinkled toadstools were cooled and dehydrated in their own hoarfrost.

Warted fruits are set as islands in an ocean of brine and jarred in a world glass. They rot at salt's pace now.

Calefaction was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Salt has blanched the prism of colors out of the cuts of coiled meat, but a tinge of the smell of smoke remains.

Chitin was shaved from the exoskeletal flank of a caught salthopper and dry-beaten to a snappy crisp.

Spooled thread cut from the dual-dimensional hearth-mesh of a phase spider.

Weeks old salt crystals line the fluted valleys of a wet stalk.

Weeks old salt crystals huddle in the stem's elbowed forks.

Air-shunting arciforms were ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

The scutum was scraped dry, smashed, and ground. Bits of the tick were squeezed of its magnetic lifeblood and vialed.

Dried, these thick yellow-brown petals bear a closer resemblance to meat jerky than most other flowers.

Light drips off the dried lunes' boundaries of influence and seeps into the void.

Ageless bone was pulverized and compacted inside the scarred intestine of a bone worm. Then it was ground into meal.

Grave moss grew into a rare and supple clump, which was then crushed and placed on a spice tray.

Peeled lagroot tuber was mashed, salted, and jarred.

Moisture was baked out of fruit by the salt sun, but Spindle glitter still alights the disc-chip.

Memory-soaked nerves were ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

An artifact of the mirror world was shattered and ground to fine dust.

The stencil on the tin depicts an animal with claws, or are they hooves? Snoods (or horns? antlers?) pucker its nose and brow. Shaggy, knotted fur, or ruffled feathers, sheath it from the heat (or cold).

Every autumn, many gulch dwellers hike to the Stiltgrounds to purchase the Fall wine. They return to their homes, steep wheat bran in the wine, and leaven dough in their clay ovens. A few are luckier; fungus grove dwellers need only step outside to harvest yeast, and friends to fungi need only shake their yeast-ridden appendages.

Malachite leaves and pistachios are bound by star twine. The greens puff gallantly at the absence of toxins in the air.

Spongy foodstuff molded into a slate-hued cube of perfect proportions. What forces married the messiness of eating with the precision of cubes?

A chopped tongue was soured in its own saliva and twisted around a stick.

A choice cut of laminated sponge was carved into serving slices. They jiggle to the touch.

Plum-white rice hulls fizzle to the touch and their awns groan an erratic  and lyrical sound.

Dreamstuff was quickened into memory and bottled before it could evaporate to emotional humidity.

Bear flesh was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Boar flesh was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Mashed beetle meat was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Croc flesh was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Crab legs were cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Frog meat was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Goat flesh was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Worm meat was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Mashed scorpiock meat was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Fish meat was cut into neat strips, salted, and smoked.

Mist-damp tissues were ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Scorched tissue was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Frosted tissue was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Tart tissue was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Hexagonal tissue was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Toxic tissue was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Deflated tissue was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Still tissue was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Strange tissue was ground in a mortar, simmered in brine, and congealed.

Shade oil was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

Blaze was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

Salve was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

Ubernostrum was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

Eaters' nectar was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

Hulk honey was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

Skulk was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

Love was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

Rubbergum was extracted from its injector, thickened in the acrid air, and bottled for culinary use.

A goat's bladder is knotted at the bottom and suspended by a strap of intestine.

A short channel of glass for keeping precious liquids glints when turned.

A jug of aluminum has been sheathed in an olive green cloth for waterkeeping.

Metal slats diffuse the volume of a two-way speaker. A small button pops from the bottom corner.

Buttons are set in a vertical pair across a rectangle of scrawled-on metal.

A solitary button is center-set in a rectangle of scrawled-on metal.

A black and grated metal platform is meadowed with the dust of time. It's crisscrossed with the tracks of tiny lifethings.

Sphinx scenes of post-Edification glamour are arrayed in gold and sunken relief around the lip of the black marble fount. The tracery of its bright veins spikes the eye but, downwell, recedes into a starless depth.

Smooth cerulean marble looks like holographic light annealed into solid rock. It's edged and cornered with gold.

It's an open portal of stacked stone.

The slate is touched with years of handprints and a ring of rust flakes off the top of the hinges. The door continues, though, its stubborn assertion of 'in' and 'out'.

At some moment in the door's past, an indweller unspooled their will to curiosity and cut an aperture for sight through the boundary.

Rail to rail panels are bulwarked by a crossbar for reinforcement of the in and out margin.

Metals cut by the cosine saw were fit-welded and put to steel frame. The lock stile is padded in chrome.

A furrowed metal plate is fit to the arch of the doorway, and a slide panel is cut from its center.

The two slates are touched with years of with handprints and a ring of rust flakes off the top of all its the hinges. The doors continues, though, their stubborn assertion of 'in' and 'out'.

At some moment in the double door's past, an indweller unspooled their will to curiosity and cut an aperture for sight through the boundary.

Metals cut by the cosine saw were fit-welded and put to a double-wide steel frame. The lock stiles are padded in chrome.

A pair of furrowed metal plates are fit to the arch of the double doorway, and a slide panel is cut from their centers.

Panes of see-through and polished glass are fit on a slide rail.

A pane of transparent glass.

Panes of polished glass were frosted dark and fit on a slide rail.

A furrowed metal plate is fit to the arch of the doorway, and a sliding panel sits recessed in the center. The panel is impressed with the mold of a key card.

A furrowed metal plate is fit to the arch of the doorway. Its hinges and rails were melted and fused to the wallframe.

A elephant slab of copper-painted metal slumps out of its ancient doorframe. The handle is kept still by an ornate mechanical lock.

A elephant slab of silver-painted metal slumps out of its ancient doorframe. The handle is kept still by an ornate mechanical lock.

A elephant slab of gold-painted metal slumps out of its ancient doorframe. The handle is kept still by an ornate mechanical lock.

Patinae have transformed the cyclopean bronze doors into great shelves of seafoam and coral. Lyrical death is depicted on the panels in high relief: chained cables lift inverted pyramids through a calcified village, gaseous fire, and vaults of brine. Skeleton harpists traipse across the freize, and goats chew copper bones on the cornices.

Patinae have transformed the cyclopean bronze doors into great shelves of seafoam and coral. The theatre of life is depicted on the panels in high relief: palm leaves lift pyramids into the star-ribboned sky, and water pours over the lip of an oinochoe. Lovers yoke across the freize, and goats chew copper cud on the cornices.

Bright tracery charts a life time of meaning through the black marble void of the door's surface. A family name is inscribed on a memorial plaque.

Brinestalk is shaved into pickets and set across an iron-latched rail.

Iron pickets are set across a latched rail.

Copper, aluminum, and glass fiber were rounded into an electrical conduit.

Copper, carbon, and glass fiber were rounded into a robust electrical conduit.

Glass was blown into a machine artery.

Glass was blown into a machine artery and ion-colored to fluorescent green-yellow with uranium.

Wood was shaved, cut to smooth-volumed shafts, and fit inside gearboxes to convey motion in continuity.

Sailcloth is fastened to brined wooden arms that rotate by windsong and turn the central shaft.

Circles of limestone, porous and oyster-gray with the shells of old things, are arranged in vertical slabs and turned against each other to grind fibrous grains into flours.

Wood paddles black with wet-rot catch the force of the babbling brook and set the wheel to the slow motion of centuries.

Brass gears, balls, and rings turn in precise mimicry of worlds and stars.

A burnished steel jacket hugs a smoldering fire pit. Scorchstrokes of many materials cake its sides.

A cased rotor is fed charge through a handcrank and supplemented by solar heat. Its scratched metal surfaces vibrate at ground frequency.

Induction coils are rooted under a cork pad, where electric juice is transferred to battery cells.

Magnetized steel drives a diaphragm upward and life water is propelled through chrome pipes to thirsty plants.

Q Girl replaced the old oscillator on this Barathrum clock with a swing pendulum. Now the several hours per day that Time cheats from its observers are reduced to mere minutes.

During the enterprise of invention, you sometimes require the use of a shapeless gray foam. Or, at the very least, you might require it one day, and so some tinker prudently got ahead of the problem and invented the brass foaminator. Inscribed on the base: 'All the foam, none of the sadness at maybe one day needing foam and not having it'.

Gas is pushed through a hose and ignited into flame. Dew gives texture to the hose barbs.

Glass lunes refract light and paint images in fictive angular size.

Rubber lines the inner topology of a motorized barrel. A kettle of ebon carbide grit sits in the underchamber ready to abrade.

Handwheel and spindle turn to sand off matter and gift the world with helices and round things. Metal dust accrues on the ground beneath.

Photovoltaics are arrayed across two socketed lunes. They spin for optimal range and confer sun energy to a vacuum-cased flywheel.

Sunrays are captured by photovoltaics across the foundation around a chrome cylinder, and the heat is used to pump water into pipes for dispersal.

Wired metal squares a cabinet of drawers and burners for toasting, pickling, and freeze-drying.

Shelves, pads, slates, and cradles are worked from metal like a chrome honeycomb. Electrical power gets concentrated into battery-juice and served into its docked cells.

Perfect-cut chrome rotors are stacked along a generator shaft, and wide fin blades catch the fluid push and spin electric yarn.

Down a traverse beam of plate shear metal thrusts a hydraulic piston. Its flat bottom is scratched into grooves by bits of trash.

Inside the glass and steel chassis, a sea of force fluid churns in turbulence. It's then pulverized into solid matter by the dynamo and projected into space as a field.

Four flanged couplings form a cross with a wavegraph readout at the center. As liquids and gases pipe through, flux readings appear in neon strings.

Two copper bulbs form a spark gap that facilitates current along a path of ionized gas. The thing snaps and sparks at you.

Inside a metal chassis, amber glyphs ride the scanlines painted by a cathode ray. Frustum keys are arranged in quiet rows.

Magnetized innards digest electrical signals and belch out the waveform, while a diaphragm breaths dust onto a brass grill.

Soda ash and limestone flow down a series of hot crucibles and canals toward the batch blanket, where glass is then retrieved and refined.

A glinting spindle of steel is spiraled with grooves for stripping wire from raw nuggets and ingots.

Metal was braided into electromagnetic scaffolding, and through it the modulator molds the clay of the baseband and divulges the shape of the new signal.

Bits of tiny matter are smashed together behind the lune of a chrome cylinder, and the heat is used to pump electricity downgrid.

Bits of tiny matter are smashed together behind the lune of a glass cylinder, and the heat is used to pump water into pipes for dispersal.

Cyclopean blades shaped to the airfoil are housed inside a metallic ring nicked with the scars of time. In the distant past, someone directed the course of air at grand scales.

Behind the pane of a bronzed frame are the programmable instruments of glassmaking: stove and blowpipe for hot work, oiler and wheel for cold.

Tetraxenonoglass walls and convalesscent gel recreate the conditions of the amnion where reptile, bird, and mammal embryos are nurtured to whole life.

It's worked from otherworldly limestone. The stone was quarried from a drift-world spinning about a darkling star whose weak luminescence didn't bleach the voidstuff from the rock's coral. Now it insulates its slumberer from the rays of materiality and conducts them to the psychic aether.

Water ribbons climb bone-blanched marble columns in high relief. They mount the archivolt and snake between helical rings before a sharp turn upward on the keystone. Here becomes there.

Water ribbons in high relief crumble off the broken marble. Pieces of the arch that once enclosed the forward motion of travelers now lie on smooth backs somewhere else.

A rectangle of neutrofoam imprinted with the human form hangs beneath an arch of glass. Across the foam at eye level, glyphs loop on an elliptical screen. Surgical machinery, obscured by blinding light, beetles out from the underside of an enclosing dome.

Grease drips from an engine of bright chrome and stains the idlers. Pulley wheels are positioned at odd angles to churn flat rubber belts through space.

Putrid dross sticks to the grooves of flat black di-rubber.

Bone-grey ash sticks to the grooves of flat black di-rubber.

Under a tarnished metal frame hangs a sheet of black rubber cut into pliable curtain strips.

Stoneware catches the tiny bit of moisture surrendered by the bone-dry air.

Stone was carved and shaped into a rough dome with square, even-spaced windows to let air flow. The small difference in temperature inside the dome causes dew to condense from air and accumulate in a catch basin below.

Heat from the salt sun evaporates brackish water. When the water condenses again, it's separated into its pure and impure elements: salt gloms on the still, while freshwater collects in the basin.

Chrome flanges maximize the surface area for evaporated air to re-settle as distilled dew.

Sine waves breaking on the glass lune encode the behavioral primitives of the enclave's mechanical children. The electron field sucks them through the antenna and into the aether.

A coffin of steel, brass, and cathode tube conceals an array of precision instruments used to suck organ-matter from the dead and deliver it back to kith and kin.

Metalfoam is packed and plated into a colossal simulacrum of the bio-arm, where the heads of the biceps and triceps brachii gleam. Colossal joints chirr at the effort of rotation.

Metalfoam is packed and plated into a colossal simulacrum of the bio-arm, where the heads of the biceps and triceps brachii gleam. Brass pinchers snap the kinesis out of their target.

A brass hem surrounds a foam shunting pad, and the above-head fretwork is braided into the once-familiar glyphs of exit symbology.

Out of a gold-plated box, kaleidoscopic tiles and tones harmonize over several dimensions.

Diamond manifolds pressurize quartz into its Ãª form, crystallizing spacetime along the ley lines in the local region. Drops of normality condensate on the flue refract light into an inner dimension.

A fullerite hem surrounds a foam landing pad, and the above-head fretwork is braided into the once-familiar glyphs of recomposition and return symbology.

Tracery on the fullerite hem is melted bright white and drips onto the cracked foam pad. Lily sprouts quicken in the cracks and push forth; life creeps outward.

The characteristic glass arch marks the enclosure as a becoming nook gutted and wire-stripped for a new purpose. A claw extends for soldering and shaping, and in the underdrum, a wheel spins wet clay fresh and ready for sunslag fermentation.

A crude stone hem surrounds a foam landing pad, and the above-head fretwork is braided into the new-fangled glyphs of reshaping and return symbology.

Wood planks are nailed at orthogonal angles, and dust sleeps on the paper jackets.

Fabrics were stuffed with watervine chaff and laid across wooden slats in the style of the hillfolk.

A goat wool bed fastened with canvas ties.

Wood slats are megaliths to a child. Feather pillows are cold meadows. Here are the boundaries of their dusk-world.

Watervine canvas is stretched and folded over wood legs.

Brinestraw was braided into a rope lattice saddle for slinging between two old oaks and napping. The fibers on the middle-sag are extra frayed from the center-mass strain of a reclining ass.

Wood was meticulously turned into columns and ornamentally whittled. Quilted downs were bartered from the seamstresses on the banks of the River Svy, layered as a cake and frosted with pillows. Here the moneyed slumberer finds a favored ingress to the dreaming dale.

Plastic white as salt bleach was contoured for peaceful slumber, convalescence, and realignment of the humours.

Wooden slats are laid on right angles in the style of the hillfolk. In place of a chaff cushion, however, lies a plastic mattress pumped with unctuous water, an alternative favored by raft-floaters who pine for the waves of the lake.

Historians of leisure divide all epochs into the following three ages: the span before ursine creatures evolve or civilizations rise to admire them, the span between ursine prominence and a civilization's capacity to fashion divans in their likeness, and thence the span until the civilization's fall.

Hidden micro-reactors smash together particles, generate heat, and power the biotic machine apparatus that rejuvenates the weary slumberer.

Planks of wood are nailed together at right angles in the style of the marsh dwellers.

Stuffed with watervine chaff and glowcrow feathers, this buttoned pillow lets folk repose with crossed legs.

Convivia in the limen, the boundary between sun-baked Moghra'yi and the shade of the Spindle, involves the mulling of cider, holography, and the arrangement of klinai at right angles.

Planks of wood are nailed together simply to form the austere seat.

Nothing is in situ, everything is in motion, and the seated must prepare for the next moment where the memory of leisure is burned in neurotic effigy. The stool abides these truths.

Jointed wood and knit watervine make a movable wharf for the ass.

The ornamentation of etched metal and precious stones designate the axis mundi.

Kneaded under the salt sun by a leatherworker and stuffed with glowcrow feathers for the repose of its owner.

Plastic white as salt bleach was contoured for ideal digestion and harmony of the humors.

It's fitted with a crankshaft that turns a dimpled rubber sheet and kneads kinks out the hindparts of its sitter.

Tight-fitted black mesh straightens the spine. Wheels descend from casters and locomote.

Plastic white as salt bleach was contoured to the posture for ideal rumination.

In its new context the peptic chair menaces. Dried blood paints the plastic seat, and its catheters fray like a knot of worms.

Hidden micro-reactors smash together particles, generate heat, and power the biotic machine apparatus that restores life to the wounded recliner.

Plastic smoothed on a heat lathe was kneaded into a design that evokes an Eater's intuition for how a perfect ball warps spacetime around itself.

Plumpness in the cushion is gauged to the seated thinker, lancet arches press into the playful back, and claw-and-ball feet suggest a hidden life within the piece itself. This is a chair laden with meaning.

Guild furniture makers, conspiring in a bright workroom beneath the Eaters' sun, stretched a cushion to the precise size of two ardent lovers and set a pleasing mail diamond at its right angle. The claw-and-ball feet suggest movement.

This bowl-shaped basket of scrounged textiles and padding yawns with the promise of a humble, comfortable embrace followed by a laborious escape.

Starfish arms are stuffed with plant matter, stiffened, and fixed around a concave disc to the perfect shape of a floor cushion for bipeds. The axial arm keeps the neck straight and upright, and a meadow of underspines administers a subtle therapeutic puncturing.

Rich green tufts are weaved to a dense and soft lattice, stuffed with watervine chaff and glowcrow feathers, and then hung on a angled wood frame.

A wood storage box with a hinged lid and latch. Notches scratched on the surface hint at the full probability array of language, and also its absence.

A wood storage box with a hinged lid and latch. Notches scratched on the surface hint at the full probability array of language, and also its absence. A drop of spilled water is engraved on an open lock.

Surfaces of dull steel are cornered in brass and smudged with finger age. The lid is latched shut.

Teeth, shell, and bones were blackened into stasis by the earthy gunk.

Brass bands frame an old iron box eaten red by air and rain.

Surfaces of dull steel are smudged with finger age. The lid is painted with a red crux and latched shut.

A metal locker that looks worn with age.

Metal slates partition the chrome carton into golden rectangles. Inside, artifacts await their planned abrasion and return to mineral form.

Wooden and chrome poles let weapons rest peacefully.

Wooden and chrome poles let guns rest peacefully.

Wooden and chrome poles let armor rest peacefully.

Chrome pegs form a lattice where bionic modules await coupling.

Chrome pegs form a lattice where modules await coupling.

A latched box of polished and ageproof metal is indented with numbered rectangles.

In a dusty corner of the past, nameless workers glazed striated marble and inlaid it with gold to house the heirlooms and grave goods of a slump-shouldered Eater.

Cyclopean marble slates enclose an interdiction prism for imperial treasures, including the creatural and sovereign Face. Across their vast surfaces, goldwork plots the geometric sequences of life and its boundaries; water spills down the bodies of world-caryatides and curls back to the welkin.

In a dusty corner of the past, nameless workers glazed striated marble and inlaid it with amethyst to house the earthly gear of a High Eater returned.

Marble striations smear into melted pink rock slag; the ageless box lies open.

Marsh reed was handcrossed by warp and weft into a vessel for sheaf and other dry goods.

Slide drawers of galvanized metal are arranged in a cabinet as rectangles of assorted dimensions. Storage is fractal.

Burnished bronze is burned to light-in-ceremony by hot coal.

A brightly burning handfire hangs across wood and iron.

A sconce of wood and iron hangs lightless.

Sharp points of chrome are the vertices of this utilitarian light fixture. Brightness bursts from its edges and lights the world.

Sharp points of chrome are the vertices of this utilitarian light fixture. Full-spectrum brightness bursts from its edges and lights the world.

Wax weeps from the stubborn candles, drips onto the sconces, forms a waxfall through the tiers of bronze.

Sharp points of chrome are the vertices of this ornamental light fixture. Brightness bursts from its edges and ignites the world.

A large storage vase with a decorative slip. The style hints that it was fired in the home-kiln of a canyon dweller.

A vessel of freeblown glass curves at the lunar arc. The style hints that it originates from the coast of the Fuming God Sea, on the far side of Moghra'yi, and that it was likely exported by the dromads.

Glass was blown to a wide bowl and thin stem in the tradition of the grove-carpeted mountain lagynos. Were the style's first artisans working through the thick and ripe air of the musa wood? Did Spindle glitter dust their marvers and pipes?

A trailed vessel was first thrown on the potter's wheel in the soft warmth of morning. A canyoneer shaped the lip with extra care to preserve the precious liquids of life.

Bronze was melted and cooled, shaped and etched, to deliver the water of life.

Clay was rounded and kilned to store oils and wine.

Clay was spun on the potter's wheel and shaped into waves, fired, and glazed into a traditional vessel.

Clay was spun on the potter's wheel and shaped into waves, fired, and glazed into a ceremonial vessel. Two pictographs are panelled side-by-side: 'life' and 'drink'.

Glazed and superheated clay lies cracked open. Two pictographs have been rendered illegible.

Painted crenulations wrap around the equator of this metal vase.

The warming phosphor of early earth is neatly latticed by woodbrick, and functions now as a microscopic star.

A burnt out wood core is enveloped in footprinted ash.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the thick clay oven, and with it comes the smell of scrumptious food.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the thick clay oven, and with it comes the smell of hot starapple jam and toasted matz.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the round mud oven, and with it comes the smell of mulled cider and brined mushrooms.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the round clay oven, and with it comes the smell of steamed goat and sweet bananas.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the round clay oven, and with it comes the smell of fermented tongue and congealed love.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the round bone oven, and with it comes the smell of leavened pastry, sweet bananas, and warm skulk.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the bright stone oven, and with it comes the smell of hot spine fruit jam and roasted tail.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the thick clay oven, and with it comes the smell of lah broth and steamed matz.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the dark electric oven, and with it comes the smell of bitter yuckwheat and boiled plasma.

Warmth radiates from the crackling fire of the round crystalline oven, and with it comes the smell of cooling static. Curiously, there are no prepared meal ingredients here.

Branches of the living tree were resorbed and reformed into trunk knots. Then, hundreds of years later, the oiled saw of a gorge woodworker disarranged the arbor geometry and flattened it for civil use. That history remains cast in two dimensions, powdered with dust and scratched in pencil.

Steel was anointed with liquid chrome, cooled, and beaten into a flat and workable surface.

Knotted wood of good moisture content holds the weight of earth at right angles. Scorch marks and salt decorate the grooves.

Wood was salvaged from moist groves, shaved into planks, and carried to the freeholds on the Shale Bridge. There it was received by carpenters who, acclimated to the wetless air, eagerly took the rich wood for their own projects.

A sharp rectangle seems to have been balanced on a metal pole over a smaller rectangle, forming a steady working surface. No welding scars are visible.

It's scratched on top where a pestle splintered the wood.

Decorated with painted mandalas and shaped by the geometric hand, the table honors symmetry and numerology.

Wood was precisely cut into drawers and set on brass rails to house clothes.

Dwellers in the earth-clefts fashion tables in the style of puzzle boxes. Their drawers house the stenographic imagination.

Etched chromium on the lavish legs tapers to claw-and-ball feet, and on the marble surface, geometric imperfections were rasped off and flung into an iron bucket that may still exist somewhere. Eaters spoke here, and planned.

A table scorched with the radial patterns of hot chemistry holds a phial rack and alembic.

In high relief, folds and knots of sandy hued shapes crown the sapphire surface of the spherical model. The juxtaposition of scales, the proportion of sea to land, and the collective wisdom harnessed to devise such a thing make your head spin.

Barathrum's invention records time to the momentary tick by regulating its advance with a crown wheel. On learning of its utility, the water barons commissioned the assembly of dozens more in order to take precise measurements of their reservoirs at set moments of the day.

The delphic countenace of the Tungsten King is frozen in chrome, cast to perfect specification.

Hard chrome was cast in the mold of soft cheeks and rounded brow; the patron king of scholarship is canonized.

Slink-green plant lobes splay out of the ancient cauldron with chromium incision. They live and breathe like their loam-bound cousins, but their bio-data was spliced with the amaranthine seed. They do not die even as the Eaters about them decompose.

Sheared slate stone is powdered with the cloudy remnants of externalized thought and held aloft by the monster.

Plastic housed in grainy wood is perforated in a grid of contact points. Capacitors and inductors are fastened in the spring clips and networked with a bouquet of wire.

Inside the scratched metal C a needle and a bobbin prepare to punch a pair of threads into a lockstitch. Initials are carved all around its pedestal.

The biped form emerges out of a cocoon of wood and fiberglass.

The biped form emerges out of a gigantic cocoon of wood and fiberglass.

Blue laser light bursts out of the reference beam and reimagines a wavefront sculpted on a light lathe. Air adds a layer of grain.

Foam plush is arranged into gyri and sulci to mimic the brain maze.

The wet paints of earth -- clay, slag, chrome, and dye -- slouch a half-idea with material weight. The transformation is arrested through indecision or neglect.

Marble blossoms on top as a spiraling volute. The column is splattered with paint.

Nacreous oil wets the ecru linen and has dripped onto the easel. From the plane of the canvas, an image is pressed out.

Half-moon glass roofs the subterrarium and protects the corpse eaters, who have prospered inside. They are an arcology of gills.

Gnu-gut strings run strata across the soundboard, and rose gold caps the rich wood knee and head.
The frame forms half a heart; the Eaters' favorite remains.

Rectangle keys are arranged down the angled ladder to step upwise in pitch. Hanging on frame is a note mallet.

Strings of gnu gut are stretched across the trapezoid. The note spoon hangs in a wooden sheath.

Rust-caked spines line the interior of an iron sarcophagus. Dissatisfied with the caliber of earthly punishments, its deviser sought to deprave even the restful slumber of eternity.

Smoking stems bloom from a crystal waterpipe.

The box is wrought from chewed wire and dented iron.

Brinestalk splinters and smokes inside a piped hearth of old stone.

A hunk of crude granite has been smoothed on top for metalworking and rounded at the side into a shaping horn.

Erosion has smoothed its features into abstraction, but once it stood in monument to the coupling of machine and folk.

Features erupt from a stone canvas and shatter into a figure from the deep past. Hair, skin, brow, thigh: the details hatch a new emotion inside you, the sense of the strange-familiar. As you move about the petrified likeness, you wonder at how this Eater managed to incise themself into your spacetime braid.

This stone idol of Oboroqoru stands twenty spans tall. Its nameless sculptor chose to depict the ape god sitting cross-legged with each of his three pairs of gargantuan arms grasping each other. The idol is swathed in vines, its caretakers ceding to nature save where the herbage has threatened to obscure Oboroqoru's gentle countenance. Wreaths of flowers of every hue the forest begets -- azure, chartreuse, indigo, carnelian -- litter the base of the shrine, insignificant offerings to what appears to be a callous god.

Abandoned in a tucked-away hut on Bey Lah's outskirts, this enormous statue of hornsfel languishes under a layer of withered vegetation. It depicts a majestic deer with one hoof raised from the ground, its humanlike eyes judging its surroundings and finding them wanting. The metal plaque on the base of the statue hasn't fared well over the centuries, and the only glyphs you can make out are 'K', 'R', 'S', and 'H'.

Nisroch the star mason is depicted here straddling the earth with his mighty legs. He dons his favorite sash, whose folds are exquisitely worked in gold.

The statue of Bel wears its tremendous weight in polished marble. He wields his epochal aegis, storied for obstructing a swirling gas cloud in the starry dawn.

Here Shekhinah has been sculpted into permanence with magnificent cerulean marble. His body is chiseled to blessed perfection. His golden diadem crowns him Father among Fathers.

Dagon the orator domineers the west apse with his brazen pose. His golden coronet shines splendidly in the fire's shine.

Carthax the athlete is depicted here mid-stride. His glistening silver hair is tied behind his head, in astral tradition, as he vaults through the firmament.

Resheph, who's called 'the Above', lifts an enigmatic finger to heal the wounds of the sick.

A monstrous head slumps in old stone, etched cysts sprouting from the central chine to evoke the spread of disease from its halfgod source. Generations of moss skirt the beast's warted legs.

Slumping shoulders edge the valley of a cracked stone back, and two pairs of mated arms join at their hundred-knuckles in the stonecarver's depiction of the halfgod's quickening. Generations of moss skirt the beast's varicose legs.

A spiny monstrous fish sits in a pool of stonecarved water. Underneath is the finned tail that poets have beating a foamy brine out the pipes at Maqqom to form the Hinnom lake. Generations of moss skirt its underfin.

Chiseled spines wreathe the sinuous worldeater, who dug the earthly caves that were peopled by late-stage troglodytes. The hundred-nine eyes of legend peer across time, and generations of moss skirt the beast's banded undergirth.

The halfgod kneels on hinds worked wide in old stone. Tiled polygons spill off the statue's base to evoke Qas's rightening of space, time, mountain, and village. Generations of moss skirt the beast's treecutter hooves.

A godswan sits in stone grace with its gigantic kite train furled to a dizzying gyre. She wears a blank and unreadable expression, to evoke the carver's sense of her as uncertainty's incubus. Generations of moss skirt the beast's down feathers.

Burnt light erupts on the chromium plate and shatters into a figure from the deep past. Hair, skin, brow, thigh: the features hatch a new emotion inside you, the sense of the strange-familiar. As you move about, the figure moves in parallax; you wonder at how this Eater managed to incise themself into your spacetime braid.

Glorious Shekhinah, Argent Adonis and First Father, poses in luminous mummery. With the stature of the ageless stars, fixed and permanent, He appraises the temple erected in His honor and cocks His head in approval. Befitting the memory of His union with the Kasaphescence, He clothes His manifestation in cerulean shades, forsaking the viridians and russets of the lowly plants and clay earth.

Stone asserts its importance by orienting toward the firmament, whence the oldest wisdom stirs.

The bellies of vessels are sacred, for they both carry the waters of life and project the fluid past onto the convex present.

Etched into this mead hall for small, winged friends are stories they cannot understand.

A narrative is confined to the etched boundaries of this stone, to the reductive duality of its form.

Glyphs inscribed into the ancient stone are refracted into the present.

Moss-stuff inserts itself into the story-world evoked into being by the carved rock.

From the hands of a metalworker rods and strips erupted and cooled into shape.

Reverence was paid to the orb, smoothed toward ideality and hoisted on brass legs.

Flickering interference patterns of light form a moire-cascading tableau.

A terracotta board has been painted with ochre and ground iron.

Geometric shapes of meaning tessellate the ringed rows around the crematory vessel: stars, triquetrae, nonagons, and lunes.

Black marble was quarried from the vast reaches of the underearth and chiseled into a stone blanket for the dead.

Cirrus clouds of neon stir inside a glass lune and beam light through the prefigured likeness of the sultan. A bleary shape thus hovers supine above the starless and gigantic black rock divan. The artist may have intended this to evoke a lightning storm over a dark plain or a lily on the pitch of a river: something to represent the bright and gaseous mind roaming over the inert body.

Wet clay sticks to a wheel and soldering board. It's flowered with diodes, circuits, vane pumps, and magnets.

Clay was fired around steel and erected in the rib cage for structural support.

A pair of retractible chrome panels are fit on oiled tracks.

Teal foam pads the inside back and the deep seat well, and dials deck the curved armrests. The whole chair swivels atop an ejection motor.

Teal foam pads the inside back and the deep seat well, and a single dial dresses the right armrest. The whole chair swivels atop an ejection motor.

Inside a metal frame damp with soup dew, a glass lune is painted with the data glyphs of navigation and two-body alignment. 3D models of a large and smaller creature rotate on their vertical axes, and a psychoelectric scan shows the status of the meld.

Anarchy is wound into stasis by time's virtual antipode and packaged into a metal disc. Only the instruction of movement will direct it to unaccrete.

Wood was shaved into a bludgeoning bulb.

An armlength of time-tortured metal is punched through with screwing iron for extra torque.

A bulb of stone is dusted by humoric powders.

Quartersawn witchwood wears a thousand nicks along its warped length.

Brinestalk was scythed from its marsh home and dried in the high salt sun. Its top is spiraled into a crook.

A corm of bell bronze is screw-fitted to a scarred wooden shaft.

Iron lines unfold into a head of six flanges.

Hand grease shines on the pole, and a volume of polished steel weights one end.

Hand grease shines on the tall pole, and a hefty volume of polished steel weighs one end.

A corm of polished steel is blown out of a combat-pecked rod.

Across Moghra'yi, wood was hewn from the trunk of a boreal titan and shaved into a stick by practitioners of the foreign art. They shaped one end of the bark into an oaken knot.

A fist-sized snail shell is coiled in soft spirals, blackened with soot, and stinks of sulfur.

It's the hoary, bowing horn of a wizened mangoat, wind-etched and gilded with scarlet tassels.

It's a gnarled, acacia staff set with a small orb of primordial amber.

The shaft widens to a rigid polygon of azure metal. Nicks and scores tally on its surface.

The long shaft widens to a rigid and symmetric polygon of azure metal. Nicks and scores tally on its two heads.

The hammer shaft is capped by a head of bright and azure metal. Darker stripes across its face and throat note where it struck and beat softer carbide down.

The hammer pole is capped by a twin-head of bright and azure metal. Darker stripes across its faces and throats note where it struck and beat softer carbide down.

A dusky mass of gravid metal, like a meteorite, is welded to a steel shaft.

A dusky and twin-faced mass of gravid metal, like a meteorite, is welded to a steel pole.

Blast furnaces sucked the tidal energy out of the planet, heated carbon to solar temperatures, and poured it into hexagonal molds. The emerald tongs used to retrieve the casts atomized and vented vanadium -- the green glint -- into the manifold, imperfecting the metal and conferring its characteristic hue.

Blast furnaces sucked the tidal energy out of the planet, heated carbon to solar temperatures, and poured it into hexagonal molds. The emerald tongs used to retrieve the casts atomized and vented vanadium -- the green glint -- into the manifold, imperfecting the metal and conferring its characteristic hue. Casts mottled with dust particles were culled and fed to lithovores, leaving only the perfect hexagonal prisms.

Quark-gluon plasma rapidly cooled and was extinguished on the voidpeaks of the early universe, except where the globules got trapped in 6D kinks of spacetime. There they glided in the slipstream for billions of years until beings discovered them, built machines to extract and cool them, and reheat them in their stellar furnaces.

Bands of aquamarine lodestone tori wrap around the hitting part of a hefty, double-fisted truncheon. On the bottom handle there's a slot for a battery to juice the magnets.

Thick and diamond-hard headbone with three horn holes functions as the jumbo head of a bludgeon. A long shaft of shining steel was driven through the maw and welded inside.

A long slate rod flares out at the collar to hold capacitors and a concussive corm.

A long slate rod flares out at the collar to hold capacitors and an electrified corm for searing liturgy to memory.

Ring magnets form a cylindric mace-head to bash against objects and syphon their electron juice into a battery slotted on the shaft.

Bell bronze is shaped to a point and its handle wrapped in leather.

Iron wormwags out of its halite stub of a hilt.

Pits mark the blade like craters on an iron edge-world.

Bright metal spills out the leather fuzz hilt along the killer's recurve.

The edge is bright and polished.

A use-dull and finger-smudged knife folds in on itself.

Wet clay dresses the edge and dirt cakes the hilt.

A wide and bright blade has been painted with entrails.

Salt and scars form a comet's tail along the azure blade edge.

Volcanic glass was fished from Fuming God Sea and chipped to shape along the Icepyres.

Blue and shining metal narrows to a sticking point.

A ribbon of leather is looped through the hilt of a bright blade.

A razor edge of dense and dusky metal zigzags in shape. Its face is matte and starless.

A matte blade of ionic plastifer sits on a finger-rest hilt. When charged it blurs in high-width motion and jostles its material obstacles out of the way.

Through a bore in the wood grip draws a crinkled beam of pale light. In motion it heats to steel-melting temperature and whirrs matter away.

Through a bore in the wood grip draws a long and tapered beam of pale light. In motion it heats to steel-melting temperature and whirrs matter away.

Through a bore in the wood grip draws a stout beam of pale light. In motion it heats to steel-melting temperature and whirrs matter away.

Damp leather wraps the wood haft up to a sharpened bit of bell bronze.

An axe edge is dressed with splinter hairs of brinestalk.

Wrought iron was moulded to a crescent for scything the rough hides of watervine.

Hairline rust ribbons the bit from hook to hook on the year-weary axe.

Its polished steel glistens on a flat plane, and skin oil stains the straps of its leathery haft.

Its polished steel glistens on a flat twin plane, and skin oil stains the straps of its long leathery haft.

A block of bright steel was sharpened to an edge.

Its polished steel glistens on a flat plane, and skin oil stains the straps of its leathery haft. The pommel is capped with a glittering opal.

Bright steel was moulded to a crescent for scything the rough hides of watervine.

The luster of the azure edge fades to shadow at the beard of the bit, and a backspike balances the whole bladed volume.

The luster of the wide azure edge fades to shadow at the beard of the twin bits. Hairline cracks ribbon the haft.

Bright azure metal edges out into an elegant half-circle bound to a steel shaft.

Bright azure metal edges out into two elegant half-circles bound to a long steel shaft.

A razored wedge of dusky metal was welded to a steel haft.

A wide razored wedge of dusky metal was welded to a great steel haft.

A thong of banded metal jitters with concussive potential. The plastifer handle is slotted on the heel knot with an battery case.

Leather was braided through a ring knot to a coiling thong. There are blood stains on the cracker tip.

Scratches checker the length of edged bell bronze, and skin oil dampens the leather grip.

Scratches checker the broad length of edged bell bronze, and skin oil dampens the double-handed leather grip.

Pits mark the length of the blade like craters on an iron edge-world.

Pits mark the broad length of the blade like craters on an iron edge-world.

The long edge is bright and polished.

The long edge is bright and polished. A wide grip is stained with dozens of oily fingerprints.

Salt and scars form a comet's tail along the length of the azure blade's edge.

Salt and scars form a comet's tail along the broad length of the azure blade's edge.

Bright metal is polished to a ghost shine. Streaks of shaded blue show where the blade was carbon-folded on the forge.

Bright and wide metal is polished to a ghost shine. Streaks of shaded blue show where the large blade was carbon-folded on the forge.

A razored edge of matte and starless alloy lengthens from point to welded shaft of steel.

A wide and razored edge of matte and starless alloy lengthens from point to welded shaft of steel.

Skeletal coral was torn off its reef-home and chewed to a cutting edge.

A ribbon of azzurum runs through the hilt and pilots the outer arc of phantom steel. The blade's edge blurs into the script of a dead stanza.

A long, matte blade of ionic plastifer sits on a finger-rest hilt. When charged it blurs in high-width motion and jostles its material obstacles out of the way.

What was once merely a carbide axe is now a florid work of art. Curling wires wind around the haft of the weapon as the creeping vine of a rose plant; modules and battery housing are mounted on the flat of its blade where the blossom might rest.

The air swims around the axe's triangular head like the heat off the high salt sun. Such a weapon of war seems a strange fit for an agrarian people like the hindren, but it serves to illustrate how cornered prey might react over long time scales.

Half battle axe and half vinereaper, the ancestral tool called Yal evokes the struggle between the hindren cultivators and the cruelty of a harsh winter. A biting cold radiates off the curved blade.

Beautiful ribbons of leaf are etched along the edges of the broad and oiled blade. The pine handle is carved with its name: Difucila.

Lifeblood the color of amaranth and dried in moonlight paints the clenched and giant fist of the dead forest Saad. The sight of it unfurls one of Time's right-blown ribbons: this is a relic in all or near-all futures, and the wielder perhaps its fossil-mate and secret sharer.

The hilt was broken and remade, pieced together from iron, jewel, and leather across the prism-scatter of the past and forever becoming something new. The blade bears the scars of techniques forcing it into killing shape time and again.

Lead is cast to a cylindric lump shaved to a point.

Pocks sprinkle the barrel steel from a hundred salt storms. The stock is spoon carved from fibrous brinestalk in the style of the Issachari dune tribe.

Carbon steel gleams on its sawed muzzle. A dented butt stock cuts at right angle to the shoulder.

A tin-slender clip hangs off the scratched chrome magazine well.

Expert rifling grooved its carbon steel barrel to helical precision. Smudges are printed on the scope glass.

A smoothbore barrel of found steel is blackened by pocks of gunpowder mess.

Telescoped cylinders pinch the mirror point, and under them grows a sylph-like stock of sea-ferried nutwood.

Three carbon steel barrels fit together into an arc-edged triangle of luminous ritualism. They pinch the mirror point inside.

Perpendicular to the neon azure barrel is a square-plated scope inset with a large ocular lens. The sight through the lens distorts as the gun tilts, but the vector drawn remains unchanged.

Gaseous coolant billows through a chiffon tube, putting dew on the wide and planar barrel chrome. It spills out onto the air from a ice-chipped muzzle.

A rifled prism refracts and refocuses light to tunnel things toward its wielder. Sophists call it a 'here ray'.

Artisanally carved wood castles a sextet of parallel conductors and a sliding photon armature. The grain is scorched black on the rifle's stock.

Hue-vapored crysteel cocoons the gold/water mechanism that pinches light from wavelength to waveshort.  Plasmon slag bubbles on the crest of the barrel like superheated sludge-life.

Astralgals demarcate the phasic slits along the frustum's length. Noise is sucked out of time in expectancy of cross-plane fusion.

The hind bone of a salthopper was scorched clean and bent to a recurve bow. Sinew is strung on the nocks.

Idler wheels were tinkered to the limbs, and wound cables stiffen to accentuate the archer's strength.

A pig sinew bow string is notched behind a brinestalk rail narrowed for a dart to fit.

Magnets on the string nocks hum and a slender curve of metal hums back. The air crackles as fingers approach the arrow rest.

Servos click on the wheeling groves and a miniature air turbine exaggerates the pull of the bowstring.

A narrow shaft fletched with bird feather is capped by a wooden head.

A narrow shaft fletched with bird feather is capped by a steel head.

Reds and oranges swirl in the bulbous arrowhead. Ignition is a notch away.

A narrow shaft fletched with bird feather is capped by a carbide head.

A narrow shaft fletched with bird feather is capped by a head of folded carbide.

A narrow shaft fletched with bird feather is capped by a fullerite head.

A narrow shaft fletched with bird feather is capped by a crysteel head.

A narrow shaft fletched with bird feather is capped by a head of flawless crysteel.

A narrow shaft fletched with bird feather is capped by a head of zetachrome.

A chrome chain wraps around a self-winding flywheel and is spotted with grease dew. One long barrel is nicked with steel scarring.

The tick of a firing pin against steel makes the fauna start. A chrome sight eases the arc of the parabola.

Grease wets the arming handle and streaks down the wide missile chute toward a welded shoulder rest.

A bright gashead tips the end of the steely death chute.

A limpid fuel pump exposes ribbons of oil slick, and behind it a voltage gauge ticks. The slanted heat shield is scorched black.

A hand pump slides into a chrome canister with illustrations of wilting plants etched in relief.

A hand pump slides into a chrome canister with illustrations of rotting fungi etched in relief.

Caked gundust is painted on the inner lune of the mortar.

It's a hermetic cask, hose, and nozzle. Inscribed are the words: 'in case of dimensional emergency, spray'.

Cables purled together form the barrel of a blastgun that fires along the cambered electromagnetic field lines.

Baroque and kite-like volumes of metal are arranged on an axis as a lathe to shave dimensionality off their inner spaces. A giant stock and grip of painted fullerite support their tremendous weight.

Sleek spiral barrels of matrixed metal cradle an enormous cyclinder of ionic gas. On fire the mixture is hyperpressurized into shot and sent to explode at sight's end.

A chrome and quartz-dusted honeycomb mounts the viewing plane and threatens obliteration to all. Bar weldings bend to its gigantic weight, and rocketheads peak out of hexagonal hive.

A smudged and salted chrome wheel clicks to moon time. Just above a brinestalk hand panel, the grip medallion shines in delphian lineage.

Black acrylic grips are run through with hairline cracks from where nervous and sweat-damp hands squeezed the precision out of their shot.

A tension spring shoves a firing pin to bang a barrel of gas and eject a cabled grapnel; then a winch winds it back.

The pistol is engraved with watervine hemp and encircled in saltstone. On the grip is an image of a nomad and knight in saltstone. The knight is striking down the nomad.

A spiral crank closes a chrome-encased circuit and ejects charge through two contact tips. Smoke twirls through their yellow glow.

Starless metal on the barrel imbibes light and routes it to the null place. The grip acrylic is patterned after ley lines.

Artisanally carved wood castles a sextet of parallel conductors and a sliding photon armature. The grain is scorched black on the pistol's stock.

A coolant pipe and an antifreeze pipe are barrel-locked in symmetric geometry. Thumb flips rotate the mechanism and reverse their orientation.

Blood sieved of chunky pieces sloshes around a cannister of tetraxenonoglass. Vacuum pressure sucks air in through the barrel, and slits on the slide stop vent a metronomic belch.

Behind the muzzle, a glass-bound nimbus of unstable spacetime curls around an astral tether. The trigger mechanism cuts the tether and out-vacuums the anomaly to the free world.

A spiral crank closes a chrome-encased circuit and ejects immense amounts of charge through two contact tips. Smoke twirls through their white-hot glow.

Raw flesh is stretched on a lump that approximates the shape of a handgun. Pressure smushes a throbbing vein against the underskin and blood-pulp is coughed out of two ribbed metal tubes on a metronome tick. At moments out of sequence, an unseen energy is piped along the psychic leys and into the organ-mess, producing a runny bother.

A tension spring shoves a firing pin to bang a barrel of gas and eject a long-cabled grapnel at precise range; and then a winch winds it back.

A handful of pellets are encased in a thick wax-paper and plastic shell.

A nutwood forestock hangs underneath the chrome rib and, when pumped, erupts into ecstatic clicking.

Nutwood stock parts were unscrewed in favor of starless metal. A greased pump slides shot to the chamber with minimal friction.

The craftsmanship of this pistol worked in brass and chrome is breathtaking: grips of kingswood call the palm to an airless wrap, the hammer is contoured to the thumb by the microinch, and the sight draws the eye down the barrel like the slipping of silk. It's engraved all around with withered ivy, and the muzzle is kissed in blood.

Ions were spun into a euhedral disc on a spinning wheel, and aquamarine was heat-set on the inner ring by deepsea steam.

A salt-scratched blade head is fit to a splintered handle with a wood wedge.

Flax was mowed from the Bowl of Iris, stripped into fibers, and weaved into a soft grid by the fisherfolk of the Pale Sea.

A piece of rock was water-cleaved from its birthing bed and tumbled by time into a sphere.

A piece of rock was water-cleaved from its birthing bed and tumbled by time into a large sphere.

It's a piece of rock, older than every book.

It's a sizeable piece of rock, older than every symbol.

It's a large piece of rock, older than every idea.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. Its lug is damp with dream dew.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. Its lug is damp with dream dew.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. Its lug is damp with dream dew.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's etched with the crossbones of danger.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's etched with the crossbones of danger.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with the crossbones of danger.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. Its cap is lined with sharp edges.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. Its cap is lined with sharp edges.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. Its cap is lined with sharp edges.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It sizzles inside.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It sizzles inside.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It sizzles inside.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's etched with a picture of an eye.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's etched with a picture of an eye.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with a picture of an eye.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's hot to the touch.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's hot to the touch.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's hot to the touch.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's cold to the touch.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's cold to the touch.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's cold to the touch.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's etched with a bouquet of outward-facing arrows.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's etched with a bouquet of outward-facing arrows.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with a bouquet of outward-facing arrows.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's etched with a zigzag.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's etched with a zigzag.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with a zigzag.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. The shell is etched with latticework.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. The shell is etched with latticework.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. The shell is etched with latticework.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's etched with stop symbology.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's etched with stop symbology.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with stop symbology.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It purrs with a distinctive crackle.

          2d100+20 damage to structural objects.
          2d10+4 damage to non-structural objects.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It purrs with a distinctive crackle.

          4d100+20 damage to structural objects.
          4d10+8 damage to non-structural objects.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It purrs with a distinctive crackle.

          6d100+20 damage to structural objects.
          6d10+12 damage to non-structural objects.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It sizzles and swells inside.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It sizzles and swells inside.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It sizzles and swells inside.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's etched with pictorals of withering plants.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's etched with pictorals of withering plants.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with pictorals of withering plants.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's etched with pictorals of withering fungi.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's etched with pictorals of withering fungi.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with pictorals of withering fungi.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. The lever is buoyed by a multidirectional spring-loaded mechanism.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. The lever is buoyed by a multidirectional spring-loaded mechanism.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. The lever is buoyed by a multidirectional spring-loaded mechanism.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It's etched with a boquet of inward-facing arrows.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It's etched with a boquet of inward-facing arrows.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with a boquet of inward-facing arrows.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. Its lug is ringed with dial ticks.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. Its lug is ringed with dial ticks.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. Its lug is ringed with dial ticks.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It sparkles in soft light.

A metal shoal of waffled hexagons is clamped by a chrome lever. It sparkles in soft light.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It sparkles in soft light.

A cast iron bulb is clamped by a lever with a pull ring. It shifts perspective in low light.

A thick metal jacket encases the explosive and is clamped to a quick-release lever. It's etched with a bouquet of explosive arrows and it rattles under its own weight.

Thick and plated bonestuff curves to its host shape.

Hundreds and hundreds of fossilized hairs crown the body in a protective coat.

Wide airfoil fin-flaps beat at the wind.

A caudal barb-thing is tipped with a jewel of venomed dew.

A pair of bone extrusions trenched with grooves race to a symmetrical point above the head.

A gene-sharpened bone spike pierces the crown.

An addendum of adamantine skull crowns the head in lithophilic regency.

Bone fractals burst from the dome in broad and stunning display.

The growth hex of time has sculpted sharp bonestuff in corkscrew tension.

Iron hooks were fastened to residual leg limbs to provide a graceless, scraping locomotion for their wearer.

A preening tool curves out the skull at the painter's angle and is dotted with a pair of breathing motes.

A flat beak for spooning mud draws out the lower face.

A beak thins to a long point for pecking through shell and bone.

A cluster of pluming feathers draw out the shape of the face in splendid color.

A long and fine beak tube narrows to a point for piercing the flower moat and sucking nectar.

Spaded palms and long claws are shaped to loosen earth and shovel it away.

Crystalline flames crack and lap at the shimmering air.

Particles of ice rain sail in small and circular ribbons.

Wool was dyed in a bath of dreadroot and iron salt, and then woven to warm broad shoulders.

The aching earth belched a ribbon of molten glass onto the Black Stair and anointed a nonet of gas-eating flax-wearers.

It's a length of salt-sucked skin cut from a goat, or tomb ferret, and it's powdered with the white dust of the dead.

A coarse flax waist is cinched with a watervine hemp rope.

Particulate from the eons-sheared shale sticks in the fibers of goat wool. They make red freckles on the garment.

Ropes of wool are woven in the angled bands of the tartan. They burnish in rich reds, greens, iron greys and sable.

Rough boar wool is cut to an imprecise semi-circle for throwing over a sun-bleached shoulder in a pinch.

Its fine white sheep's wool creases are soiled with the sticky loess of the broad-shouldered world.

Boar hide was brined, limed, and put in a tanning drum. It was cut and fitted into an apron, and now it's a brown canvas for knife scars and tong burns.

Rough tight-spun yard balloons at the calf but cinches at the ankle. The heft of the textile weighs the wide straps down.

Billets of shaved dogwood contour to the breasts, waist, and thigh. The husk is beetle-eaten.

Boiled goat leather was cut to a cuirass and fit with straps and iron buckles. It smells of beeswax.

The reedy guts of an ivy tangle were ripped out, laced, and gilded with an embroidered sash.

Ancient and inscrutable pegs of chrome fished from the trash sea stud thick wedges of boiled goat leather. 

A scratchy kirtle was taken to a pocket seamstress and accoutered for cave delving and trinket fishing.

An apron is pocked with carbon craters the color of the light-sucking void, a thing dreamed by sophists who watched the stars race toward their excluded middle.

Linen was cut to body shape and put in a dye bath of dicalyptus leaves and iron shavings to achieve a chromish luster.

Rough and itchy flax was coarsely threaded, cut to shape, and cinched by a hemp rope.

A leather shirt is mantled with sewn-in loops of steel.

A shiny mesh of linked loops that were sourced from the steel heart of the trash sea.

Cane-beat steel is shaped to the pectorial lunes and stitched to an undergarment of padded goat leather.

A vest of mingled fungusfill cut from the molt of a chitinous jungle cat has been painted and glazed lucid.

A bolt of stretchy, spun fabric was cut to a bodysuit for sneaking.

Fabrics from across the plateau -- quilted eiderdown, weave-of-brinestalk, sticky elastyne -- have been dyed and sewn to a jacket of colored chaos.

Nicked folding metal of dull azure is shaped to the pectorial lunes and stitched to an undergarment of padded goat leather.

Cloth was dyed in a bath of dicalyptus leaves and iron shavings to achieve a chromish luster and then tailored to a ruffled shoulder-skirt.

A swathe of elastyne is sheer-stretched over a cuirass of semi-hard plastic, forming a suit of maneuverable mail.

Blinding light shines off the slick and stretchy suit of vulcanized sap and creates a postpartum amniotic sac.

A cuirass of gas-caught foam stiffens instantaneously when pressure is applied. Its karst surface is dusted with the colorful abrasions of chiliads and the chemical reactions they produce; the material has careened past the outer rings of its expected lifetime and into the unknowing void.

A cuirass of gas-caught foam stiffens instantaneously when pressure is applied. Its karst surface is arrayed with tube sleeves and dusted with the colofur abrasions of chiliads and the chemical reactions they produce; the material has careened past the outer rings of its expected lifetime and into the unknowing void.

Rubber tubes worm their way through salvaged elastyne filted with filters to recover wastewater from the overworked body.

Goat leather is vertipacked with a stratum of loam and the seedlings are nourished to make a walking bush.

Hyperdense metal in meteor black was superheated and banged to the shoulder and chest shapes.

Flakes shaved off a big wedge of the gravid metal have been heat-fused to some kind of animal leather.

The manifold fibers are colorful and have a touching texture like no other fabric. A molecular weft was pulled through shrinking warps on a fractal loom.

Tetraglass tubes of coolant and antifreeze snake their way over the keg-mail's compressors, and condenser and evaporator coils spin out the shoulders like grandfather trees above the insulation shrub.

Dyed crysteel canisters are fitted to a backrack. Their valves pop out of flux pressurizers, and a splay of hoses allow for several input flows.

A dense mesh of dilated tetraglass tubes convey coolant and antifreeze over the keg-mail's jumbo compressors. Blower motors drone a low hum, and condenser and evaporator coils spin out the shoulders like grandfather trees above the insulation shrub.

A calcerous shell was whittled to a hoop dress. Its whorls impress the eye with pleasing geometry before swerving to uncomfortable and dizzying disharmony.

Wool of many colors was horse-bought from the dromads and sourced beyond the Pale Sea and its great pan of salt. Once the Issachar spun it to yarn on the wheel, a marsh dweller hand-knotted the tzitzit.

Coarse goat wool is dethreading from where brushes have combed out the salt and silicon.

Shorn from the back of a sacred lemur, the hair is laced in a prophet braid.

A silk shoulder drape has been cut and dyed with crushed insects shaved from an oak from the Bowl of Iris.

A shroud of goat leather is circle-stained by the acids of time.

There is spotted dazzle on the cut hide that brings its bounded strider to pantherine selfhood.

Platinum stitch on a field of salt white brings recognition only to the mirage-trained eyes of the Issachari. The banner has been sewn into a scarlet collar.

Force is pushed across bronze spines through an improbable series of flapping motions, whereupon parasols pop open to catch the mercurial wind.

Hair of unknown origin sticks to the diamond pattern on nylon hip and shoulder straps. Zippered and buttoned pouches allow for the lugging of all the underearth tools one needs.

The crocheted leaf and moss-mass that carpets the hot-smoking yurts of goatfolk has been sewn to a leather collar, giving its wearer the appearance of a creeping bush.

Soft fur is cut from the alabaster pelt of an albino ape into a broad-shouldered cloak.

Bees crawl over the back-mounted slatted rack. A few more dart around nearby.

Shining stitch in the style of circuitry forks down the shoulder fabric.

An old ropeworking ritual was used to weave a back-worn net of fibrous and supportive straps.

A silvery flowing cloth moves with the lightness of fabric and then hardens in stillness or under the pressure of contact. A light patina is starting to form on the stitch.

A thousand-thread coverture is given its candescent hue by the bluing ore and the harsh light of the Great Desert's foreign and eastern shelf.

Articulated blades unfold to form an aerial screw that gets blown upward by an air thruster mounted below. On activation, the equipper takes flight.

Gloved prosthetic hands attach to the ends of articulating rods. The control mechanism is housed in a false spine box.

Air circulates and the sheet-standard breathes; the edges of the red diamond shrink and lengthen. Blood courses through the arteries of time and into the tissue of the new flesh.

Movement puts the birds stitched into the soft pleats of cloth into stuttery animation.

Prism-studded skin was shorn from a dead monkey and sawed into a cloak.

Slate tubes assemble to scaffold the human form.

Points of discontiguous matter flock in a crescent to a mock wind. Together they bend light across its full spectrum and blur the wearer's torso to a polychrome mess.

Coarse fur is cut from the thickset pelt of an ogre ape into a broad-shouldered cloak.

Cerata pendulate on the cape like prism grass of a windy meadow. They mirror rich hues in cerulean, ruby, star orchid, and void; together they shine to resplendent effect.

Electrodes shine on the lattice across the uuflax weave. Sleeves, widened in fashion, display the gold and cyan heraldic circuitry.

A gargantuan slab of burned and rolled chrome was unjointed from an earth-mover. It shadows its monstrous wielder like a starsail.

Twigs from the witching tree are pared and twisted to a garland for hindsun.

The crown is crushed by wear into a hundred papery creases, and the brim is stained in the fractal signatures of sweat and salt.

In wool paper and acrylic the pain of experience is smoothed away into the uniform child's cone. Arterial clamps peek out from the interior surface. The cone is fastened by a brass chain, adorned by beads of glass, and branded on the apex with the Holy Rhombus, a sign of the price of innocence.

A leather wrap for the skull is stitched in the brimless style for those who prefer fitting into cracks over shading the jeweled eye.

Red lace wreathes the face to accent the sun-gladdened cheeks of a vintner's wife.

A hideous beak cants over the brain cavity and shades the face in the frightening light of a dim and aching sun.

A second skull was raised as a cone from a sheet of desulfurized metal. Tiny initials are scratched in.

A cap of gunk material that arconauts call black stretch was fished from rubber grottos and stuck to the scalp.

A spiral cavemouth of xanthous shell armors the head while only minorly impairing vision.

Soft fur is cut from the alabaster pelt of an albino ape into a tam with earflaps.

A wearable square is modeled on the bricklayer's mortar board and decorated with a colored tassel.

A hole-cut sheet of steel links fits over the head and neck.

The moss-strewn antlers of some great elk appear to have grown through an ageless, leather helm.

A halogen light sits affixed to a leather head strap.

A dome of iron and hardened pulp contains its own source of illumination.

A hood of gas-caught foam stiffens instantaneously when pressure is applied. Its karst surface is dusted with the colorful abrasions of chiliads and the chemical reactions they produce; the material has careened past the outer rings of its expected lifetime and into the unknowing void.

Leaves grow over a domed layer of wearable topsoil.

A fluted visor is satcheled in strands of tungsten filament. Two antennae coil out the temples in robotic likeness.

The stone-dented metal of aging dusk wraps the brain in a second skull.

Prism-studded skin was shorn from a dead monkey and sawed into a hat.

Coarse fur is cut from the thickset pelt of an ogre ape into a tam with earflaps.

Airy thoughtstuff was deposited by the pressure of the material realm into a jellified substance and curled into a cirlet. It's bejeweled with crystalline microlife, symbiotes hatched in the thick of the psychic sea.

A calcerous shell was chopped off at the tip. Its whorls impress the eye with pleasing geometry before swerving to uncomfortable and dizzying disharmony.

A crinkle-sheet of papery metal pokes at the angle of repose.

Tetraxenonoglass blueshifts light hitting the outer shell. On the inner side, electromagnets excite a lining of star mollusk tissue to create the perfect psychic accoustics.

Cloth in the sunbanning hue of salt sight is folded snug to the fit of head and neck.

The sun beams on soapstone with cheeks made high and proud of ochre and teeth. The shadow of a noon canopy bespeaks a treeline thicker with leaflife than any on the plateau or at all north of Moghra'yi.

The moon scowls on an unseen jungle, the craters of brow shaded with animal ash and eaten to a natural ridgeline by the venomous breathe of gods.

Hot fire on soapstone bleeds into damp night at a twilight terminus drawn in blood. The mask wearer assumes this and all dualities.

In wool paper and acrylic the pain of experience is smoothed away into the aspect of a child. Neuronal clamps peek out from the concave interior surface. The mask is fastened by a brass chain, adorned by beads of glass, and branded on the forehead with the Holy Rhombus, a sign of the price of innocence.

Chrome-brass rings and swarths of leather are precisely cut from a tinker's stencil, but the real signature is on the glass: a scatter of speck-sized fractures from the high salt gales.

Light flecks break themselves on the silver moat and rush back to their place of origin. The signifier becomes the signified; the simulacrum is realized.

Focus-ringed binoculars read the tells of infrared light and produce a textured picture of eye-warm greens.

A folded triangle pouch of burlap was impregnated with vinewood sap to absorb noxious vapor.

A durable plastic mask has been fitted with a simple filter to protect against noxious gas.

Curved glass caps the narrowest in a series of concentric brass tubes. The widest one is fitted with a leather head-strap.

Two almonds of glass sit in wireframe cups and resharpen the world's edges.

The hoops sport rhombic facets that reflect light at wavelengths between plum and quartz.

Silver was melted and cast to a perfect sphere in isomorphic veneration of the Kasaphescence.

The glass lune is showered in information across the electromagnetic channels.

Visual Instrument and Sensory Augmentation (G Edition)

Data is painted back and forth between the glass lunes of visor and wristlet. Whereas the outer trim shines gold on F Edition, on this model it fades to grey.

Ring-molds on the laminated metal frame collect ambient sensory data and use it to augment the viewing frustum.

Quickened dreamstuff swells to tidal forces and electrifies the membrane of the rondure. It gives off smoke in marble.

Geometry swims across the crystal diodes of the mask. Its expression is smiling in the hypnagognic key.

Glass arches cut and fished from the trash sea have been paired by palette and cored into beads. They've been hung on a dried strand of goat gut and bartered up and down the River Svy.

A broad tube of pipeline copper is a makeshift gorget. It's splashed in patterns of worm blood and sea rust.

A glass lens encages a magnetized needle and sits inside a leather wristband.

Miniature airfoil blades spin on the circular face and blow gentle air.

A slender cut of brass was forged in a serpentine crucible and painted with the vexing stripes of nature.

This simple arm brace is crafted from boiled boar leather and tied on with braided lace. The strips of protective hide are designed to redirect glancing blows to the arm and protect poor archers from their own errant bowstrings.

It's a shifting minichart of lifesign voltages picked up in the heat and sound signatures of nearby fauna.

On the wrist mount, echo-shaped models in three dimensions expose the structural irregularities of simple inanimate objects nearby.

A bangle clasp features a bright cobalt button.
You think this is the real Moon King? It is.

A small hexagonal switch sits across an unadorned wristcuff of chrome.

Diodes burn their cyan light through an atmosphere of glass curved around a metal link.

Gridlines and a red dot are painted on the glass lune, and simple rectangles depict the once-ordered streets of chromium that've since burst like gnarled roots through space and time.

A knitted sleeve warms itself through contact static.

Slick grease-stuff coats the hexagonally-arranged pores across the surface of the metal torus. There's a push cap for lubricant refills.

Hieroglyphs of fluctation are incised on the inner surface of this shiny metal torus.

Plutonic metal is etched with a two-dimensional projection of the rhombic dodecahedral honeycomb, allowing it to snap onto the ley lines of the local region.

Bars partition the bangle clasp into three bands; a cobalt button summons the rest of the quartet.

A dial clicks at right intervals on the metal wrist, and mercurial silver courses through tubework along the plastifer sleeve.

Handwear cut from the hides of down-canyon boars and worn by brinecutters to guard against the briars of the stalk.

A hundredth-generation canyoner cut goat hide to the modeling shape of a bone hand that stuck out their workshop wall of ancient lime.

Steel scales dusted in salt cord the fingers and wrist in a metal exoskeleton.

Skin-tight gloves of a conducting mesh jolt the hands into high performance.

Soft fur is cut from the alabaster pelt of an albino ape into thick-fingered gloves.

Mitts of gunk material that arconauts call black stretch was fished from rubber grottos and tailored to hand.

Leather gloves are steeled by extruded wire meticulously curled into hundreds of chain links.

Nicked folding metal of dull azure is hand-cut and stitched to a pair of undergloves made from padded goat leather.

Gloves of gas-caught foam stiffen instantaneously when pressure is applied. Their karst surfaces are dusted with the colorful abrasions of chiliads and the chemical reactions they produce; their material has careened past the outer rings of its expected lifetime and into the unknowing void.

Hyperdense metal in meteor black was superheated and banged to articulated finger and palm shape.

Prism-studded skin was shorn from a dead monkey and sawed into a pair of gloves.

Coarse fur is cut from the thickset pelt of an ogre ape into wide-fingered gloves, and giant knuckles sawed to points stick through.

Cerata pendulate on the muffs like crystal-mold on a tree ring. They mirror rich hues in cerulean, ruby, star orchid, and void; together they shine to resplendent effect.

Fullerene finger extensors splay like fashionable court nails. Their girths are shrunk or unshrunk to task requirements by minuscule servos embedded in the webbing.

Channel grooves are cut into the gloves' static-dried palms in the impossible patterns of leyline geometry. The fingers articulate at intersecting radials and spin the latent into being.

Boar leather vamps are scuffed with little fissures sparking in wind-rasped quartz.

A pair of strapped shoes are cracked on the soles in sinelike patterns of gravel walking.

Scutes are arranged like stony pikes around the apron of the shoe. Light reflects off the enamel shine.

A cord of gold wire fished from the computing guts of the underearth lace the shoe-tailored leather of a dead boar.

From welt to shank under the ink-smudged boot, a thin plate of magnetized nickel force-welds the wearer to the iron loam.

A canyon pearl fastens sandal straps embroidered in the syncretic imagery of swiftwater nymphs. Like the glacier flow itself, the veneration of Calypso moved with the mystai down the sundered honeycomb and in through the shale fissures beneath the olive mount. There it fractured into the mysteries of the many-named wives, where the memory of freshwater became more faceted than its smooth surface of origin.

Leather boots are steeled by extruded wire meticulously curled into hundreds of chain links.

Steel bands bearing their prying scars have been riveted to a pair of pleated boar leather boots.

A swath of gunk material that arconauts call black stretch was fished from rubber grottos and stuck to the feet.

Nicked folding metal of dull azure bands a pair of lake-fished boots.

Some clever tinker has fused a spring-loaded tendon around each boot to mimic the gait of a large, sprinting bird.

Steel bands bearing their prying scars have been riveted to a pair of pleated boar leather boots. Their soles have been smeared with sliding wax swabbed off the hydraulic presses of the Eaters' tomb.

A pair gas-caught foam sneaks stiffen instantaneously when pressure is applied. Their karst surfaces are dusted with the colorful abrasions of chiliads and the chemical reactions they produce; the material has careened past the outer rings of its expected lifetime and into the unknowing void.

Silver wire cinches a feathery cut of skin from the ghostly yeshyr, hunted in the orchard ruins north of Odrum. They are fastened by a smoking pearl.

Welded bands of aging dusk shield the legs but weigh their wearer to the earth like ore.

The ankle is cinched by a leather strap and goldleaf buckle; crushed plant matter soils the soles.

The finned and wheeled boot had become the sigil of several sects of socionauts by the Late Sultanate. For decades their progenitors careened through the capsule pipelines of the slouching arcology, dismantling it plate by plate, pursued by the constabulary but ferried by their skates to the safety of their moss-skirted hideouts. The metaphor was writ large on the glass guts of the city: Scorch the past. Rocket into the future.

Calligraphs are incised in uneven rows and columns that meander across the quarter and back stay of the boot. Their character mass appears to orbit a central statement: The path is contracted. The rest of the script is etched in a variety of signs and styles that offer competing and composite interpretations of the cryptic proclamation.

A kaleidoscopic tartan textures the tongue and vamp. On the backstay, a diode square displays the image of a morphing wall.

Ur-metal strips on the soles are magnetized by bosonic coils, producing a continuous ribbon of negative-mass bubbles that repel the wearer upward.

Cerata pendulate on the shoe tips like the Beetle Moon curled through fog. They mirror rich hues in cerulean, ruby, star orchid, and void; together they shine to resplendent effect.

A shining jewel, container for gigantic melancholies and gigantic mirths alike, is beset inside a strapped sandal of sheyd leather.

A torso-length lens haloed in refraction waves is suspended in mid air.

A mote of gentle light darts about in the patterns of life.

Color swirls around a mote of glow dust.

A phosphorescent opal-like fits in the palm of a hand and glows with the light of auroras absorbed chiliads ago. It floats about preternaturally.

Particles blip off a probabilistic core and appear traced across discrete shells of energy.

It's a robotic eye lidded by a furcate chassis and embellished with antenna lashes. A minuscule barrel pokes out from its pupil and vibrates. The inner lid is articulated, allowing the drone to scan for incoming projectiles and shoot them down with laser light.

Giant, flattened rings of hypercooled crysteel correlate their wearer to an astronomical body and serve as celestial equator, declination, and meridian. Their edges are filed on a nanon lathe and slice through orbiting debris.

A black particle defies the light-drenched world and charts a helical orbit.

Minarets of raw bile hue, blackrot, and poison jade wheel about a zeropoint and blur in iridescence to a rainbow of malady.

Minarets of viscus hue, hair/nail flax, and bloodclot ruby wheel about a zeropoint and blur in iridescence to a rainbow of lifeslush.

Minarets of force potential, lustreless chrome, and greyscale wheel about a zeropoint and blur in iridescence to a hexagonal rainbow.

Minarets of dazzle paint, abyssal shine, and subconscious fuzz wheel about a zeropoint and blur in iridescence to a rainbow of stupor.

Minarets of auroral gas, electrified emerald, and fused metals wheel about a zeropoint and blur in iridescence to a rainbow of plasma.

Minarets of shale dust hue, crushed snail, and sparking marble wheel about a zeropoint and blur in iridescence to a rainbow of mineral.

A wheel of dogthorn cut with hill-clan sigilwork is secured to the arm by a leather strap.

A blushing cheek of mined iron was hammered to a wheel for arm defense.

A loop of polished steel was stamp-cut from a toppled metal press and fit with a holding bar.

A steel kite flaunts the hieroglyphs of tooth and claw.

A blue kite flaunts the hieroglyphs of tooth and claw.

The broad and tall aegis is a halved kite of sunbeam and starless dusk, and painted across her sword-nicked plane is the Holy Rhombus of the Temple.

An earthen pot of Svy mud fired in a marsh oven captures a few handfuls from the soil sea and contains them in a bubble world.

Metal frames are mounted on treads to protect against wheel-cramming detritus.

A layer cake of wide-age rust grants dimension to the ancient and flat-faced astagon. Its front is painted with the coat of arms of an archaic house -- white runic script on a field of crimson.

Boartooth beads on the ancient charm are worn to nubs by the cartilage of time, but the flexing cable that holds them together is as strong as the day it was woven. Dangling from the bracelet is a figurine of a deer, carved from a mysterious substance that cracks light like crystal but weighs like metal, producing a shaded lifelikeness elsewhere unseen.

A different glyph for 'life' is light-etched on each of its shining chrome segments.

A girdle of ribboned muscle squeezes the wrist and wets it with a burning grease.

Two turrets of sun-conducting chrome cap cylinders of burning gas, which straddle a metal trellis of spades girding some sort of guild mark. A 6-helix of fume, signature of the star engine this flier is wrought through, twirls toward the sky.

Once-familiar paper, paint, and beads are rearranged to a beastly shape. Pale lights of Spindle color gleam in the eye sockets, and a wicked beak opens in menacing stillness. Across the visage brass chains fasten the pieces of torn innocence that craft the Murmur.

This black slab of metal has been burnished clean of any symbol that may once have emblazoned its matte surface.

From deep as stratum 29, this cape was knit from trash; a thousand years of history now draped across the ass.

A cross-section of trash reef has been whittled to the shape of a star. Chiliads of life-things, rocks, and ersatz matter ribbon its arms: a mosaic of polyps, a bouquet of kelp, burned glass, minted chrome, nebula shell, iris milk, and stray photonic fuzz peeled from a decaying hologram.

A starless, triangular prism of black glass holds still.

Sharp points are run through with bright and brilliant amethyst and sapphire. The colors remain but smolder to heather in their dying light. The chime is grave-still.

Byzantine purple smolders at a medium hue on the sharp and linked prisms of the crystal. It hums with new life and ingenuity.

Broken crystal narrows to a hateful razor at the shard seams. It cracked at the resonance curvature of anguish, and fell out of its host rock as a shattered promise.

A curtain of thrumming cables make a mantle for hunched shoulders. They pitch at neuronal frequencies long dormant.

An ocean drum of unknown zircon cleans itself of dust down to the mote by electrostatic cancelling. The center cross affords a wielder's grip.

A thorn crown arranged of crystals at telling psionic angles make a landmark in the psychic sea.

A ribbed cable of tangent needle points squeezes the limb and quickens its biomatter beyond expectation.

Shining jewels are scattered across the contours of a galactic visage, and edges drawn between them sketch the outline of a sashed Fool. Far away at the chrome crest, beads of bright and searing light suggest the shape of a medial ewer, and beyond its spout, a vast and timeful structure. The inside of the mask is ribboned with burnt tracery from where it was molded on a gallium lathe, then dyed with the milked irises of shedim and set to dry in a pool of warm static.

Burning rubies, carnelians, and garnets are arranged as a warm and giving sun. Diminutive rocky orbs pass by in the near space of the visage, and in the far space a prism of freight lengthens into a wider void. The inside of the mask is ribboned with burnt tracery from where it was molded on a gallium lathe, then dyed with the milked irises of shedim and set to dry in a pool of warm static.

On the countenance, ribbons of alabaster cloud circumscribe a lapis sea and forests of jade. At the median of it all, a Spindle pierces the outer rondure and disappears beyond the composition. A second obstructed spire, what must be the Spindle's shadow, soaks up the light thrown off by the southern sky of crystal white. The inside of the mask is ribboned with burnt tracery from where it was molded on a gallium lathe, then dyed with the milked irises of shedim and set to dry in a pool of warm static.

Jasper rocks break on the edges of the mask and hem in a pale sea of milky quartz. The Spindle bisects the wide Face, and symmetry blooms beneath it. The inside of the mask is ribboned with burnt tracery from where it was molded on a gallium lathe, then dyed with the milked irises of shedim and set to dry in a pool of warm static.

A single mount of inlaid basalt and malachite splays open; an image of the Spindle blossoms from its center and dominates the festooned aspect. The inside of the mask is ribboned with burnt tracery from where it was molded on a gallium lathe, then dyed with the milked irises of shedim and set to dry in a pool of warm static.

A bowed lune is cracked from where it was smashed off the gallium lathe. The shedim had no eyes left to color the dim and final Face, and it lay too long discarded in a pool of warm static. The sultanate is broken.

Though it is approximately the size and heft of a human infant, this shiny black device's shape is more akin to a fetus torn early from the womb. Its surface is slick and warm, with a pale pulse breathing somewhere underneath its pitch-black skin. At the end of its tail is an orifice studded with hooked teeth, eternally questing for an anchor point that it never finds.

All-color nacre is hardened into an ontologically perfect shape; the mathematics of spheres are mere approximations. Inside, ribboned patterns of aether are frozen in stasis and cohere as a moonlit vista, a scene somehow tethered to the spacetime point whence you observed it. The meaning of this pairing is unknown and unknowable.

A gigantic whorl lip snapped off the driving wheel of culture, fell out of its star vault's orbit, and, through the eroded methods of time, arrived here. Astroexotic spores lash its metasteel underrim, pilgrims from a hot fungal core biding time between now and some mystifying future point.

A blooming kitesail of extrasolar flax is knitted on battens to catch the poison air of some faraway swamp planetoid and power an ecumenical cycle. Its clews are stitched with syncretic plethora from across the dreaming gamut.

Unshafted from its lanterned machine temple orbiting a star some hundred thousand light years away, the great gear looms in stasis. Dust from a hundred neighbored planet-homes tip its fluted teeth, while its bore is slick with amaranth and incense oil cultured over the lifespan of a gardened civilization.

A giant clockface is traced with lemniscates to gauge the entheogenic pressures building in abyssal sun cores. The priest of the machine who took its readings and sung the dial left is indebted to the distant colleague whose klatch invented the whistled language 8000 years later.

Tiny glyphs are inscribed on each exterior face of the handheld box.

A tube of tetraxenonoglass glass glitters inside with opaline syrup.

Light catches on four opaline corner pieces and a raised medallion set in the center of tessellated uuflax. Wonders are woven across the cyclopean tome.

Ceremonial bell iron is shaped to an axe edge.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to an axe edge.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a broad axe edge.

Ceremonial bell iron is shaped to a short point.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to an short point.

Ceremonial bell iron is shaped to a blade's edge.

Ceremonial bell iron is shaped to a wide blade's edge.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a blade's edge.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a wide blade's edge.

Ceremonial bell iron is shaped to a hexagonal prism.

Ceremonial bell iron is shaped to a wide hexagonal prism.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a hexagonal prism.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a wide hexagonal prism.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a smoothbore barrel.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a spiraled barrel.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a sawed off barrel.

Ceremonial slag steel is shaped to a barrel and grooved with helical precision.

A ceremonial chrome wheel clicks to moon time, and the grip medallion shines in delphian lineage.

Black acrylic grips are paired off the sides of ceremonial chrome magazine well.

A tin-slender clip hangs off the ceremonial chrome magazine well.

Perch fish nursed in the aquarium silos of a vacated sector were netted and skinned into strips. Those strips were tanned with chrome and stitched into this vest.

This frock is knit from imperishable uuflax stolen from an archway garden during a union dispute between the weavers' guild and the high-strata window makers.

Wrested from the liminal tiers of a shale-toppled spire, this animal skull was handed over to an etcher for decoration.

An imperishable uuflax sheet was torn from the elephantine spools in the market and sewn into a headdress.

Masks maintained their sacred status in the lives of the Eaters, even as they lost the capacity to stitch them into their own faces. This one is no different.

An imperishable uuflax sheet was torn from the elephantine spools in the market and stitched into a talma.

Perch fish leather was worn by fishworkers in the earlier sultanate, but by the time of *sultan* it was prized by gentlefolk. This pair is exquisitely crafted.

While the steeple fires raged below, brave arconauts sank into the glowing depths to retrieve valuables. When their corpses were found, the sand in their pockets had been blown into glass beads. Sometime after, those beads were strung into a bracelet.

Perch fish leather boots, finest make. They were either stolen from the crypt of an older Eater or fashioned by a cordwainer to look like it.

A chipped-off chunk of Spindle, magnetized by the fall to earth, orbits its chosen warden.

Far from the soaring aegides of earlier periods, this concave ward was merely bent and polished on a municipal lathe.

Chrome flakes fell like dander from broken belfries into the trash sea. They were scooped up by orefishers and traded up the silk chain. This shirt is fashioned from the flakes twisted into rings.

Early period Eaters modded their genes to grow ur-filament hair. Later, once that technology was lost, graverobbers sheared it from their cadaverous scalps. In the time of *sultan*, it was called finery. This vest was knit from the stuff.

Early Eaters had enlarged their skulls for cosmetic reasons. By the time of *sultan*, the high minaret dwellers took to wearing them as helms. This one is exquisitely decorated.

Early period Eaters modded their genes to grow ur-filament hair. Later, once that technology was lost, graverobbers sheared it from their cadaverous scalps. In the time of *sultan*, it was called finery. This hat was knit from the stuff.

This cloak was knit from strands ur-filament hair robbed from the graves of early Eaters.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a glass replica of a crysteel hauberk.

Rubber insulation that diamond-tiled the high pneumatic ducts was cut free at midnight and ferried to a coven of tailors, who then stitched a bodice.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a glass replica of an crysteel miter.

Rubber insulation that diamond-tiled the high pneumatic ducts was cut free at midnight and ferried to a coven of tailors, who then stitched a tam.

An imperishable uuflax sheet was torn from the elephantine spools in the market and stitched into a geometrically patterned talma.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a glass replica of a pair of crysteel gauntlets.

Rubber insulation that diamond-tiled the high pneumatic ducts was cut free at midnight and ferried to a coven of tailors, who then stitched a pair of mittens.

A glossy foil clasp was pried off the glass guts of the polis and etched as jewelry.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a glass replica pair of crysteel sollerets.

Rubber insulation that diamond-tiled the high pneumatic ducts was cut free at midnight and ferried to a coven of tailors, who then stitched a pair of pantofles.

A chipped-off chunk of luminous Spindle, magnetized by the fall to earth, orbits its chosen warden.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a steel replica of the soaring aegides.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a glass replica of a crysteel hauberk, then reinforced with stonegut.

Dead sponge was heaped into hexagonal prisms at Maqqom and ferried through canals to vault-shadowed kurna. There it was washed clean and spongeworked into a blouse.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a glass replica of an crysteel miter, then reinforced with stonegut.

Dead sponge was heaped into hexagonal prisms at Maqqom and ferried through canals to vault-shadowed kurna. There it was washed clean and spongeworked into a bonnet.

An imperishable uuflax sheet was torn from the elephantine spools in the market, twice-folded, and stitched into a geometrically patterned talma.

Dead sponge was heaped into hexagonal prisms at Maqqom and ferried through canals to vault-shadowed kurna. There it was washed clean and spongeworked into a pair of gloves.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a glass replica pair of crysteel sollerets, then reinforced with stonegut.

Dead sponge was heaped into hexagonal prisms at Maqqom and ferried through canals to vault-shadowed kurna. There it was washed clean and spongeworked into a pair of slipshoes.

When they were active, the crysteel blast furnaces belched slag into a belt of hills that cinctured the old arcology. In the age of *sultan*, the slag was mined and moulded into a steel replica of the soaring aegides, then reinforced with stonegut.

In vast abyssal halls spire-tall machine presses crushed black spheres into diamond killer. Once the lights burned out, magpie troupes cut hunks free with gaslight tools and brought them to the low-strata smitheries. This piece was forged into a cuirass.

In vast abyssal halls spire-tall machine presses crushed black spheres into diamond killer. Once the lights burned out, magpie troupes cut hunks free with gaslight tools and brought them to the low-strata smitheries. This piece was cut and fitted to a plastic hauberk.

In vast abyssal halls spire-tall machine presses crushed black spheres into diamond killer. Once the lights burned out, magpie troupes cut hunks free with gaslight tools and brought them to the low-strata smitheries. This piece was forged into an armet.

In vast abyssal halls spire-tall machine presses crushed black spheres into diamond killer. Once the lights burned out, magpie troupes cut hunks free with gaslight tools and brought them to the low-strata smitheries. This piece was forged into a pair of gauntlets.

A bright chrome clasp was pried off the glass guts of the polis and etched as jewelry.

In vast abyssal halls spire-tall machine presses crushed black spheres into diamond killer. Once the lights burned out, magpie troupes cut hunks free with gaslight tools and brought them to the low-strata smitheries. This piece was forged into a pair of sabatons.

In vast abyssal halls spire-tall machine presses crushed black spheres into diamond killer. Once the lights burned out, magpie troupes cut hunks free with gaslight tools and brought them to the low-strata smitheries. This piece was forged into a aegis.

Mellified skin is sutured to colorful uuflax in a psychotomimetic likeness to the Eater idols in the age of *sultan*.

An imperishable uuflax sheet was torn from the elephantine spools in the market, thrice-folded, and stitched into a geometrically patterned talma.

Offworld goldleaf spirals on the starpath.

An imperishable uuflax sheet was torn from the elephantine spools in the market, tetra-folded, and stitched into a geometrically patterned talma.

A snow white trapazoid of fine ape fur, prized for its beauty and warmth.

A mat of coarse and golden hair is splattered with blood in two shades.

The pearly carapace rounds about a handspur and can be employed to deflect melee blows.

A saw-toothed bladestick of bleached chitin is still stuck to by the gore bits of a dead salthopper's last meal.

A chunk of metallic debris.

The forces of slaughter have rearranged parts of the body. You ponder how rearrangement means something different in each of its contexts: pieces on a game board, favored courtiers in a king's hall, and parts on a body.

Fire has poached the light from this body. Its stillness writhes against the changing soil.

Who's preserved the skins and innards of this still one? Was it the dry air of Moghra'yi? Or the doting persistence of human ritual? Does it matter?

The blood is still wet. Never had you regarded wetness as a sort of clock, until now.

Here lies a humanoid who'd have never guessed their torso would shelter dust from the gills of tiny mushrooms, but should have.

Tissue was mineralized while it grew and then snapped off the tree of living things to become an artifact of life. It was then stewed in burnt peat and turned to a hard goo.

Matter was crushed, burned, and granulated into a soft powder.

Tissue was mineralized while it grew and then snapped off the tree of living things to become an artifact of life.

Poking out of a pool of coral resin are the unbleached bones of a human adult. Its remains have seeded a grove of otherworldly shrooms.

Poking out of a copse of brinestalk are the unbleached bones of a human adult.

These appear to be the flattened remains of some vainglorious humanoid.

A minuscule graphene array that processes optical data against a repository of organic lifeforms.

A minuscule graphene array that processes optical data against a repository of robotic lifeforms and artifacts.

The emitted frequencies of your tiniest bits are synchronized with the standardized band for force emission.

Carnal instructions dictate the reformation of the face's bone structure and plump tissue mass into a soft and angelic countenance. Through such thaumaturgy, the people of hoary Ibul, cradled in the breast of a collapsed ice shelf, wander its lamplighted streets in rosy-cheeked disinterest.

Small distortions in the electromagnetic field caused by machine folk are visible to this sensor.

Geosocial location data is painted across the glass lune and is underlaid with representations of the living loam that has shifted over earth to take its place.

Planate chutes conduct the myoelectric force and push the body through water.

A fractal lattice of dermal applique conducts the inner glow to the outer world. 

Encoded on this chip are the neural patterns of a particular skill.

Pillowy fiberglass scales tense around a supporting axis. Once installed, they'll unwind and inflate under the skin.

Nerve-packed retina scatters incoming radiation and bends light so the irises turn jade.

Banded ropes of hydrogel are bundled into one.

Nerve bundles so arranged to stimulate muscles in the arm along a parabolic slide rule.

The diaphanous dermis throws the circulatory, muscular, and nervous networks into silhouetted relief.

Chrome clasps fasten arm joints to emulate the stillness of unlife.

Neuronically charged tissue sheaths transmit the will faster than what cell biology had achieved.

Blue carbide merely dents where weak collagen would be smashed to bits.

Skeletal hand of cobalt blue metal remains suspended in temporary lifelessness.

The quartet of knee joint extensors gain the assistance of a synthetic fifth.

Between the multipronged sticktool and cipherbox, one can interface with all available robotic ports.

Nanoscopic stents inflate the gossamer brain-threads that restrict the conduction of the will.

The metabolic rhythms of the Holy City's denizens are synchronized to their diurnal rituals: during the day, repose in prayer beneath the shade of a fluted ziggurat; during the night, prowl the toxic arboreta for sacrifices.

Near the Fuming God Sea, where seawater crashes into sunrock and erupts into mephitic vapor, a labyrinth of volcanic grottos form a dimensionless space where the utility of sight wanes. For the children of the deep, new senses wax in its stead.

Compressed gas drives piston rods into musculature powdered with graphite dust and sends the jumper soaring.

Carbide plates are molded to skull shape and alloyed with foam that inflates on impact.

Inverted tops balance the microstructure of a control unit housed in a bionic disk. Inside, the phases of reality are overlayed and projected outward.

Heat-activated gel is stored in a bionic capsule and dispensed through subcutaneous rubber hoses.

Spikes tipped with crysteel are sutured to the skeleton and shoot through the skin and ground when tensed.

Encoded on this chip are the schematics for a whole class of low-tier artifacts.

Carbon fiber shoots out of two electrodermal contact pads.

Interlinked plates of wafery carbide tessellate into a subcutaneous sheet.

The new flesh is as ghost film, cloaking none of the machinery of life.

A whole new pair of hands fabricated from graphene and neutrafoam. Their pylons await engagement.

A whole new arm fabricated from graphene and neutrafoam. Its pylon awaits engagement.

Neutrafoam ropes are banded and bundled into a fluted column.

Instructions dictate the reformation of the face into a countenance that arouses latent desires in its onlookers.

The microscopic cartridge synthesizes dopamine at a rapid rate and floods the neural pathways in motivational bliss.

An apparatus-in-chromium that pumps blood in smooth waves rather than the frantic beating of carcass-grown muscle tissue.

For ages they dreamed, 'the hands must grow'. In the soft luster of a laboratory, the dream was realized.

Stents and pneumatic applicators are hardwired to an intelligent control unit that dictates the injection of protean dyes into the veins.

Ionic dust dissolved from palladium facilitates the transfer of computing current.

Fluted keys for every wavelength along every spectrum permit entrance through every portal.

Three catheters imprint the skin from underneath.

Pillowy neutrofoam scales tense around a supporting axis. Once installed, they'll unwind and inflate under the skin.

The flux inside this milliscopic cask can fold space on just a large enough scale to shunt a human chassis nearby.

Meticulously detailed modeling software and instructions for facial reformation allow the host to assume the visage of choice, forever obsoleting masks.

Carbide mounting rods scaffold a gyroscopic shelf designed for extra baggage.

Digestive bile and alkaline churn in glass chambers, while synthetic tissue sieves out bio-toxins.

Paracausal circuitry excites the structure of spacetime into a normotropic particulate.

Encoded on this chip are the schematics for a whole class of mid-tier artifacts.

Black fullerite merely dents where weak collagen would be smashed to bits.

Skeletal hand of jet black metal remains suspended in temporary lifelessness.

Triangular treads swathe the teeth of giant gears that turn to locomote. Their human has escaped the confines of bipedal motion.

A contoured, plasteel body-plate absorbs impact shock and disintegrates into the bloodstream.

The back-mounted gun rack of polished chrome has two slots for pistols to sit over each shoulder or for a single rifle to sit over the shoulder of choice.

A geospatial core is fitted with a bionic tether.

Laminated metal is bound as concentric spheres, softening magnetic eddies and powering near-field orbits.

A small lune of tetraxenonoglass is curved at Q radius to account for interdimensional parallax.

Encoded on this chip are the schematics for a whole class of high-tier artifacts.

A magnetically-shielded headstock holds space in kinetic suspension while a force spindle spins and sharpens it to a point.

A length of raw space was kineticized and sharpened to a point.

A plastifer arm forks from the scapula and copies instructions issued from nerve to muscle in its grown twin.

A dozen armatures and manipulators splay out from a metal brace that fuses to the metacarpals.

Picophase transceiver arrays assemble an exquisitely detailed model of one's surroundings.

A microturbine skims hemopower off the circulation of blood and the chemical reactions therein.

Crystals involute along angles of stillness.

Emulsion slicks on the cheek and laser light evokes pareidolic warmth.

A minuscule graphene array that processes optical data against the final ontological and phenomenological ledger.

Around a central processor, neural grafts attach to the brain lobes responsible for the feeling of social warmth.

Shaved crystal faces are matrixed and angled to pipe stillness across a graph of live vertices.

Dappled crysteel merely dents where weak collagen would be smashed to bits.

Skeletal hand of dappled emerald metal remains suspended in temporary lifelessness.

The flux inside this milliscopic cask can fold space on just a large enough scale to shunt a human chassis nearby. Nonlinear circuitry calculates all possible outcomes and discards those that land the host outside the target area.

Encoded on this chip are the neural patterns of a particular skill tree.

Reticulated around the quatrefoil of an elephantine splat are the filed glyphs of sightlessness, messages from the fellowed mysterion across the Gulf. Wings and banisters are ordered in the perfect dimensions of some type of strange hierarchy.

Wavecrests of slag interrupt the plane geometry of the gigantic seat, scars of index to the moment when the mystai rolled the ruby boulder it was carved from out of the hoggish earth. The splats and claw feet are burned and disarranged; the ritual of transformation never ends.

Chiliads of glitz are stuck to the naked folk carved in relief of the aureate seat. They people that gilded hill, their bodies conjugate to each other in every way geometry allows, spilling out from the crest and down the scroll arms that once upheld the quivering limbs of a high priest to lust.

Across the whole of its wide splat and planar armrests, hairlines partition the chair and its vibrant stones into clusters of galaxies. Their fractal patterns at microscale put them beyond the skillwork of now-fossilized carpenters; they must be the scars of leylines.

A tiny wedge of plastic.

Crisp pages of goatskin vellum are bound into a codex.

Sheets of flayed and stretched goatskin are bound together with sap and scrawled on with kid blood.

A sheet of loose leaf is divided by coordinate lines in cyan. It seems to have been torn from a binder.

Paper made of brinestalk pulp is covered in a shaky ink scrawl. It looks like it's been crumpled and uncrumpled many times.

Several sheets of tattered, age-stained parchment are bound together at the margins by some sort of glue.

Several sheets of tattered, age-stained parchment are bound together by a strand of kelp from a distant reef.

A voluminous tome whose pages are bound between two slabs of waxed wood.

Fine pages of lined parchment are bound into a algebraic codex.

A machine of spiraling gear trains and canals of copper has been meticulously tooled onto the coverboard of the Mechanimist torah.

The coverboard of this ancient and hefty tome is faded to the average hue of ten thousand families of dust and skin oils.

This large-print volume is made of hand-pulped and pressed brinestalk paper. Its cover is preserved with resin.

This large-print volume is made of hand-pulped and pressed brinestalk paper. Its cover preserved with resin.

A loose ledger of vellum has been rolled, bound to umbilici, and sealed with the wax mark of the Mechanimists.

A loose ledger of vellum has been rolled, bound to umbilici, and sealed with the wax mark of the master maker.

A loose ledger of brinestalk pulp has been bound to sticks of waxed wood and furled.

Beneath the metal shutter, a crystalline disk is grooved with microscopic pits that encode data.

Inside the small cask, liquid salt transfers ions to the cathode and produces spark.

Spinning the stannic cuboid about any of its axes of rotation generates a pinch of resistance. A wrist strap and gyroscopic frame enable the cell to absorb and store its wearer's kinetic energy.

The photovoltaic cube bakes with the warm of the High Salt Sun and stores it as quickened juice.

Million-year-old earth rock decays inside the battery box, where the pinged out gamma particles are routed through a junction diode and stored for explosive power use.

An ursteel casket pens in the magnetic field that holds positrons in suspension. When a current is formed, the paired particles annihilate and send the full force of universal rupture through a channel and to a device.

Inside the insulated cask of the battery, the electromotive apparatus cracks the energy out of acid and converts it to electrical charge.

Inside the insulated cask of the battery, the electromotive apparatus cracks the energy out of oil and converts it to electrical charge.

Inside the insulated cask of the battery, the electromotive apparatus cracks the energy out of lava and converts it to electrical charge.

Inside the insulated cask of the battery, the electromotive apparatus cracks the energy out of blood and converts it to electrical charge.

A length of brinestalk is wrapped in oil-sodden cloth.

A phosphorescent opal-like fits in the palm of a hand and glows with the light of auroras absorbed chiliads ago.

It's worm silk gauze spooled about a wood rod and suited to staunch bleeding.

A glass tube and hype needle deliver a tonic directly to the bloodstream. This one is empty.

Lichen sticks in the winding grooves of woodshed, shimmering and smelling of spice.

A glass tube and hype needle deliver a tonic directly to the bloodstream.

An array of tinkering utensils clang against tin: tweezers, a tiny hammer, pliers, inverted pliers, glass marbles, and three wrenches.

An array of tinkering utensils clang against carbide: voltmeter, polyjack, soldering knife, ion shield, circuitboard, and three spare vacuum tubes.

Its head is a shard of grinded metal, pointed on one end and flat on the other. Dust is stuck in its hairline nicks and shines across the opalescent spectrum of rock possibility.

A pneumatic tube is driven under a ratchet and through a giant drill head. Crenulated air pockets allow for vibrative absorption to create a cascade of pressure, while stabilizing backstraps protect the wielder's contact points from unsafe joggling.

A toboggan repels above the ground and gently rocks on an ethereal wave. It's encircled by a corona of wafting dust.

Tiny glyphs are inscribed on each exterior face of the handheld box. Though contrarians still puzzle over their meaning, most of Qud's prominent linguist cults have converged on a single interpretation: 'For When Both Nature and Architects Have Failed You'. One brass pull ring separates you from the promise of those words.

A slotted back satchel heavy with core metal weighs the shoulders down. Stenciled on the side is a pictograph of a drill pointing down into the earth.

Ink is jetted into and under the skin canvas by a needle and rotary motor.

An wood-carved jewel box opens to a photographic plate and light beamer. Slit in the crystal around the edge is a verse chosen from the rhombic torah.

Spurred on by their aspiration for a fully autonomous, climate-controlled banana grove, Research and Development at Hegemonic Fruit devised the neuro animator, which knits a nervous system into the inorganic material of inanimate objects. Originally, full sentience was their product diffentiator, but within months cheaper alternates like Spray-a-Brain came to dominate the market.

A transmitter discoid beeps out staccato noise to create interference across short-range frequency bands.

A cassette is cut with hexagonal grooves and steeped in the right amount of magnetic charge to spool a spacetime tether (and generate its characteristic hot gum smell). On top, a recessed button snaps the potential and initiates the recoil.

Some tinker concocted a siphon tube and pressurized nozzle to spray liquid they didn't want to pour.

An aerosol can blown full of foaminating caulk.

A chalky white cap of rice lattice sucks the salt from liquid volumes. The letter 'H' is etched on its face.

Pink slime kneads the inner wall of a glass bottle and starts to take the shape of what's on the other side.

SPRAY-A-BRAIN: If these walls could talk...

Iron fragments mottle its cankered surfaces.

A weighty and tapered block was molded from the two-tone soup of liquid copper and tin.

To ritualize the passage to Brightsheol or another thin place, several ornaments were interred: coin, manikin, locket, and pipe.

A clump of brassy metal was tumbled free of its host rock.

A clump of metal shines in the starbright hue.

A clump of metal shines in the jeweler's hue of bright sunslag.

The shadows of tiny nebulae are crushed into the contours of a small stone.

A thousand sunrays are refracted through the prism of a small stone.

The black bellows of the earth are etched into red polish.

It spent millions of years tucked into the folds of earthly sediment. Then it was cracked from its cocoon, a brilliant butterfly.

Oceans reflecting the skies of a thousand fractal worlds are tucked into a geometric volume.

Impurities in the stone mother verdant things, the pattern of life repeated on a smaller scale.

It hurled through the void impacted in a black rock and slammed, shining and free, on our world.

The shadows of tiny nebulae are crushed into the contours of a small stone. All its rough edges have been polished to shine.

A thousand sunrays are refracted through the prism of a small stone. All its rough edges have been polished to shine.

The black bellows of the earth are etched into a red egg. All its rough edges have been polished to shine.

It spent millions of years tucked into the folds of earthly sediment. Then it was cracked from its cocoon, a brilliant butterfly. All its rough edges have been polished to shine.

Oceans reflecting the skies of a thousand fractal worlds are tucked into a geometric volume. All its rough edges have been polished to shine.

Impurities in the stone mother verdant things, the pattern of life repeated on a smaller scale. It's rough edges have been polished to shine.

It hurled through the void impacted in a black rock and slammed, shining and free, on our world. All its rough edges have been polished to shine.

This figurine worked from *material* intricately depicts *creature.an*:

Wax from the hives of Odrum is mixed in dye and moulded to the shape of styli. Together in the box they sample the iridescence of the world and offer the tools to expand it.

Carved and stained olive wood houses the steel teeth that grind irregularities from cooking salt.

A hot metal clamp compels burning hair to the wheeling curves of the gyre.

A toral pane of crystal bisects the straight edge and puts a greasy bubble in center view.

Tubes of known purpose splay at welded joints and support a plank for sitting.

Fronds are splayed out in a waxy imitation of life. It looks hard and greasy up close, but as you back away its edges burn into softness and it performs the tree function.

A sphere of some black pyritic metal succumbs to the negative pressures of gravity and tries to fall upward.

A cube with a mere four corners. Facet pictographs for sun-up, mid-day, sun-down, and mid-night insist on a new division of days. It's carved with fanciful depictions of broken clocks.

A large camel bladder is knotted at the bottom and suspended with a strap of intestine.

A phial of metaglass.

A phial of glass.

Chrome was molded into a canister and fastened with a brass mounting bracket.

Collagen was molded into a liquid vessel.

A quivering bleb of static lengthens its dimensions excitably like an anxious life-thing.

Magnetic glass spike-warps the placid ferrofluids contained within.

Nary a scholar knows who composes the Annals of Qud or when the chronicling began. But the Quantivists devised a way to entangle their own pages with the offical ledger, allowing them to insert themselves into the histories in a favorable light. A few such pages remain.

Rime-dotted nodules crust over the infected skin, where an algid mist clings. The fungus colony has terraformed the epidermis into what looks like a miniature range of ice-capped peaks.

Tiny spore-motes flutter down from the fleshy gills that twitch on the striated skin. Trapped inside are another thousand spores waiting to be jostled free.

Dozens of tiny mouths tessellate the infected skin, their moist lips pursing in asynchronicity and panting out prattle. Every so often, the cacophony harmonizes into sensible speech.

A wax-weeping fungus has encased the appendage in a lucent cast. Body heat melts the innermost layer, and a thick, waxy milk sloshes against its hardened prison.

Tapered lobes of cross-dimensional fungus flesh tap a center growth to the sequence of the prime numbers. Inside, sporelife readies for puffing.

A coded rectangle of paper metal can be slid through lock mechanisms to open some types of doors.

A warded stave of burnished bronze waits to unturn the right lock.

A warded stave of bright silver waits to unturn the right lock.

A warded stave of burning gold copper waits to unturn the right lock.

A warded stave of polished chrome waits to unturn the right lock.

Toothed imperfections in the crystal are the biting cuts of a secret key.

The torsion of an external crank drags a rosin-slathered wheel against a metal cable, whose protestations emerge from the wooden case in a low, melodic groan.

The ancient bronze coin has a square cut from its center. Time has furnished it with a seafoam patina.

A silver shekel was stamped with the vine-swathed scales of the bazaar.

An old and platinum shekel has been incised with an image of the Very Old Bird.

A paper steel disc has been stamped with the profile of Barathrum the Old.

A cord extruded from metal ore conducts current when laid together.

Pieces of the old and aching world have been shaved off their timepoint and crushed to the vicinity of the present. A few bits of recognition remain:  lens of glass, serif of ink, acid-ate lug, and ribbon of wire.

It's a volume of waxstuff, secreted by plants and cooled into a block.

Hued and life-wet beauty was gathered in twine to make a point. Now dead stems and petals desperately grasp each other.

They're petal-shaded arks of nectarous secrets.

A candle quartz blossom spreads light across the color spectrum and concentrates it in pails of petals.

Here lies the metallic husk of a defunct waydroid. It's been stripped of its valuables: copper wire, LED lights, and chrome bearings. It beeps and whirs no longer.

Here lies a waydroid in unknowing slumber. Might a willing tinker give it life again?

This patch of furry skin is painted with dried blood.

There's dried blood in the salted furrows of this patch of watervine.

These shards of splintered wood once formed the haft of a weapon, which must have been broken in combat.

This waterskin is filled to the brim and sealed with wax, as if from a merchant's stores.

Copper was crushed into a nugget and picked from its natural deposit. It's bisected by a scratch.

Only a great saltback could leave a print the size of a hot spring.

This rot-black lump of stringy flesh could have been someone's diseased tongue.

The chaff of the yuckwheat stem tastes even worse than the stem itself, and it has no medicinal value, so it's no wonder someone threw it away.

Upset guts were turned outward and exposed to rot in the stale air.

Leather scraps were cut from a wider swath for some unknown leatherworking project.

The leather bracer frays where it was ripped open.

This crude hammer is the kind used to strike rivet sets and punches when leatherworking.

Gooey analeptic residue still coats the glass tube.

Dried blood paints the tip and shaft of the wooden arrow, but its colorful fletching remains pristine.

Tally marks on the bottom of the chest's lid account for its contents: dried lah petals, vinewafers, and waterskins.

This leather bracer is striated with streaks of dried body-salt, the marks of heavy use.

Gouge, spoon, punch, chisel, blade, and shear. These tools were made by a masterful crafter for the art of leatherworking.

Plumes of noxious gas stick to the air. They crowd the lungs of wet-blooded creatures who can't extract the displaced oxygen.

Bone bits are aerosolized into a thick coal fog. Light is lost inside.

Ribbons of emerald and neon lace streak through the crackling air and bloom in violent florets.

Hot aerosol swells as it starts to dissipate into air.

Machine-chilled water was depressurized to a freezing fog to hold the processes of life in suspension.

Even now the nimbus of vaporized acid is condensing, starting to settle on its colonized surfaces, starting to sink through their soft edges.

The nickel-dew sticks to the air and arrests the transient molecules of migrant-matter.

Miasma settles the lungs of its neighbors and guides them to the dreaming dale. Their bodies repose.

Cobalt gas seeps into the nose and disarranges the mind.

Tongue, nail, and spleen were caked together then lacerated by heat to airy dots of dung.

Gas molecules arrange along the ley lines of this plane to form an aeriform mesh. Objects on orthogonal trajectories are netted and shunted back toward their planar homes.

The synthetic mist called Golden Dawn ascends from its canister to atomize leafage and leave a clear view of the horizon in its wake.

Magenta showers the heterotrophs in a wet film that inhibits their absorption of dead animal and plant-things.

Minuscule hexagons of crushed glass, insect parts, and polyester film twinkle in the air like the ionized helium of star dust.

Brumes of spinning mold-dots make the air look fuzzy.

Hot air crests over an eddy and flares in the baking light.

Air cracks under an eddy and blows supercooled moisture to sparkling dust.

Shining images of distant places and times project off the faces of a platonic prism-thing, and sound waves are pulled apart to the asymptote. The leylines are knotted here, and the illusion of locality crumples away.

A burning flame of amber floats below a psychic wick.

Shadowing segments arrange along the ley lines of this plane to form a geometric mesh. Objects on orthogonal trajectories are netted and shunted back toward their planar homes.

In stagnant pools, luminous lilies compete with the ribbon of stars in the night sky. Under the salt sun, though, they shrink into the shade of brine weed.

Clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years.

[wall]

Spore-rich slime glistens on the cage-like fruiting body, trimmed like a hedge to conform with the ordered angles of domesticity.

Rock is eroded to sand, sand is blown into lakes, lakes are buried in mud, and mud crushes sand to rock. Earth is rearranged.

Invertebrate life was sucked of its tissue and bled still over millions of years. The glaucous rock is a necropolis.

Lacustrine ecosystems, cast in lime-rich mud, put their million-year-old affairs on display in chalk-white shine.

Carmine clouds assume their crystal habit: cubes nested inside and out. Why does Moghra'yi conceal this form from the sun?

Burnt crystal gold tosses its geometric shadows onto the floors of a million watery grottos.

Black stone stands in monument to the cities of snails that perished under clay and rotted into pyrite.

Reefs were the arcologies of the young oceans. Now they are turquoise crypts, their surfaces bitten by acid water into rough wounds.

Stony eggs are incubated in pearly planar sheets. No larvae ever hatch; they're abraded into dust.

Unnamed to the beings of the surface world are the birthing atria of the subterrane, where ultramafic rock is wetted in amniotic fluid and birthed as a world-serpent.

Volcanic dust pupated in its deep-earth cocoon and cracked free as grey stone. Sophists theorize it's the color of pure aether.

Dappled crystal mosaics of red and cyan are the metamorphic remnants of crumbling world-plates. The new earth struggles to be born.

Snails and coral were crushed on the geologic press, painted into ribbons of impurity, and polished along the ideal plane.

Outworld hard-shelled beings were harvested from planetesimals, burned bright in the magenta exhaust of their scavengers' ships, and crushed together in astral slingshot to reentry.

World-voids in the nethermost reaches of the planet are partitioned by numinous masonry. There is meaning in the patterns of its faint white filigree, but it's discerned by no one.

Feldspar and its cousin rocks are composited and pocked with static-pattern grain. Cracks foreshadow the pebbles of the future.

Braids of fibrous plant veins enmesh compacted mud and weep a brackish blood.

The scars of lava flow are legible as little ledges across the wide stone. The small darkling holes were once the birth craters of dissolved gases.

Time and chance -- the two hands of nature -- have woven roots, stems, and leaves into a fibrous dam.

Clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years. The whole stone is cut across by shining black ribbons.

Clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years. The whole stone is cut across by shining gold ribbons.

Clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years. The whole stone is cut across by shining red ribbons.

Clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years. The whole stone is cut across by shining purple ribbons.

Clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years. The whole stone is cut across by shining blue ribbons.

Clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years. The whole stone is cut across by shining green ribbons.

Clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years. The whole stone is cut across by shining green and gold ribbons.

Islands of carbon gravel populate an ocean of bitumen and rise from the horizontal plane toward the emptiness of the air-rasp. Time and pressure have laid hair-line trenches along the basin.

Black islands of carbon gravel populate an ocean of bitumen and rise from the horizontal plane toward the emptiness of the air-rasp. Time and pressure have laid hair-line trenches along the basin.

Sheet metal is locked in diamond pattern and welded to enclose. The surface is scorched and scratched in sections.

Longwise infill plates of burnished crysteel are girdered by fulcrete beams. Life sounds echo through their empty spaces.

The cracks in the wall are fossils of the compressed foamcrete's hexagonal expansion pattern.

The poison aqua moss brightens the metal form and attracts brass-drunk bugs.

Smooth grey stone hides its bonded pebbly innards and cement blood-paste. It's streaked with dirt.

A cut of pink and fuzzy flesh has been stretched and tanned to roof its wards.

Here are several stripped trunks of sallow brinestalk bonded with mud.

Tree bark was burnt black by skyfire assault and now gleams in the after light.

The quickened flax of the earth was duck-weaved in a simple square pattern and hung up on pickets.

Stripes of watervine and brinestalk straw are batched and angled to divert salt slag.

Here are several stripped trunks of sallow brinestalk bonded with mud. Hung against them, from a quartet of nails, is a frayed mothwing mask; its delicate leaves of rust-plaster are crocheted with nanoweave and stretched across an armature of stiff wire. Where eyes once peered and a mouth breathed, resin now fills the gaps.

Burnt clay ingots are laid crosswise, and a barrier is made. Each brick is marred by the variegated cuts of time, imperfections in the heat balance of the oven it was fired in, and fungi in its birthing mud.

Fluted columns of prism glass scatter the sight of becoming into a thousand fractured vistas.

Vacuum tubes slice through circuit topography like rivers on a fold belt. Hot gas heaves through and suffuses its brass and silicone acres in a red glow.

Vacuum tubes slice through circuit topography like rivers on a fold belt. Cold gas heaves through and suffuses its brass and silicone acres in a cyan glow.

Vacuum tubes slice through circuit topography like rivers on a fold belt.

Sand was crush-fired and molded into lucent panes.

Sand was crush-fired, pigmented, and molded into smokey panes.

Cerulean light from inside the Spindle channel glimmers across the pane like stars on a galactic disc or diodes on a circuitboard. The light breathes godliness into the glass.

Cyan bursts through a glassy hull and looks as though the sky was crystallized into a thicket of hexagonal prisms. The Eaters dug it up from its magmatic birthsite and arranged it into mounds to enshrine the Spindle.

Here are several stripped trunks of sallow brinestalk bonded with mud and strewn with flower petals.

Several sharpened trunks of sallow brinestalk were driven into the ground here.

Several sharpened trunks of sallow brinestalk were driven into the ground here. The gaps aren't wide enough to squeeze through.

Spirals cross the grain on the dogthorn pickets stuck into the ground.

Pailings of age-nicked iron stand in a row between two horizontal rails.

Salt-tracing waves cross the grain on the brinestalk pickets stuck into the ground.

Glinting light is sculpted in parallax to the illusion of a shale wall: clay and quartz were dried and smashed into the red rock that's been quarried by hillfolk for thousands after thousands of years. 

Glinting light is sculpted in parallax to the illusion of a marble wall: snails and coral were crushed on the geologic press, painted into ribbons of impurity, and polished along the ideal plane.

Glinting light is sculpted in parallax to the illusion of a sandstone wall: rock is eroded to sand, sand is blown into lakes, lakes are buried in mud, and mud crushes sand to rock. Earth is rearranged.

Glinting light is sculpted in parallax to the illusion of a thatched wall: stripes of watervine and brinestalk straw are batched and angled to divert salt slag.

Old stone worked to waist height to stop spilling but not seeing.

A low wall of solid sandstone.

Wisps of steam coil out of vertical vents cut in columns from tarnished chrome.

Wisps of noxious fumes coil out of vertical vents cut in columns from tarnished chrome.

Sparks fly from vertical vents cut in columns from tarnished chrome.

Tiny scratches mark lateral vents cut in rows from tarnished chrome.

Normality condensate tesselates the vertical vents cut in columns from tarnished chrome.

Long dead and blown into particulate by billows of Golden Dawn, dead moss sticks to the vents of tarnished chrome.

Long dead and eroded into particulate by magenta showers, dead moldstuff sticks to the vents of tarnished chrome.

Wisps of steam coil out of vertical vents cut in columns from soot-stained chrome.

Freezing mist coils out of lateral vents cut into the chrome wainscotting of a marble pillar.

Cold dew dresses the lateral vents cut into the chrome wainscotting of a marble pillar.

Potential is polarized into a cyanic hex mesh and keyed to its arranger. Objects of sufficient mass are blocked, but small ones fired leeward can pass through.

Potential is polarized into a scarlet hex mesh and keyed to its arranger. Objects are blocked unless they are molecularly whitelisted.

A blurry flim cordons off a wedge of spacetime with so much quantum friction that its inhabitants are ground to a halt.

This is an exquisitely detailed high relief cut from precious cerulean marble. It depicts the Sacred Joining, as recounted by Shekhinah the Father to the temple high priests. In the early dawn of our universe, the Argent Fathers roamed the timeless aether with inert hearts. There, in the coldest distance of space, they discovered beauty-and-chrome incarnate, the Kasaphescence. Together they wrought machines from Her naked womb to inhabit a hundred earths. In the scene here, the Fathers first approach Her Radiance. They are led by Shekhinah, who occupies a position of prominence.

This is a high relief cut with exquisite detail from rare, cerulean marble. It depicts the Edification, as chanted in the Canticles Chromaic. After the Sacred Joining, the Argent Fathers molded the plasmatic metal of the Kasaphescence into edifices fit for inhabitance by mortal folk. They wrought spires onto mountains and arches over rivers. Here, Shekhinah oversees the construction, gazing east upon His new, gleaming world.

Fulcrete dyed with integral pigments bursts into mottled color. It's been incised with regular geometry that draws the eye across the horizontal plane.

Whole worlds are carved in bas relief, simulacra of the motley lives of ash-dreaming Eaters. Palm leaves lift pyramids into the star-ribboned sky, and the water of life pours over the lip of an oinochoe.

Bone-shapes of the human form are disarranged to tessellate properly. Round skulls require ulna knots to fill the gaps in their sequences. The boundaries of this world are rice-white and filled with presence.

Whole worlds are threaded in three-dimensional filigree, simulacra of the motley lives of ash-dreaming Eaters. Palm leaves lift pyramids into the star-ribboned sky, and the water of life pours over the lip of an oinochoe.

sultan_wall

Gigantic, old stone was stacked, knapped, and carved in long arcs to the style of the day in the time of *Sultan1Name*. Since then, the project has accrued collaborators, and their signatures are writ everywhere: here, the lacuna of a vandal's edit; there, the soft strokes of time's brush.

Gigantic, old stone was stacked, knapped, and carved in long arcs to the style of the day in the time of *Sultan2Name*. Since then, the project has accrued collaborators, and their signatures are writ everywhere: here, the lacuna of a vandal's edit; there, the soft strokes of time's brush.

Gigantic, old stone was stacked, knapped, and carved in long arcs to the style of the day in the time of *Sultan3Name*. Since then, the project has accrued collaborators, and their signatures are writ everywhere: here, the lacuna of a vandal's edit; there, the soft strokes of time's brush.

Gigantic, old stone was stacked, knapped, and carved in long arcs to the style of the day in the time of *Sultan4Name*. Since then, the project has accrued collaborators, and their signatures are writ everywhere: here, the lacuna of a vandal's edit; there, the soft strokes of time's brush.

Gigantic, old stone was stacked, knapped, and carved in long arcs to the style of the day in the time of *Sultan5Name*. Since then, the project has accrued collaborators, and their signatures are writ everywhere: here, the lacuna of a vandal's edit; there, the soft strokes of time's brush.

Gigantic, old stone was stacked, knapped, and carved in long arcs to the style of the day in the time of Resheph. Since then, the project has accrued collaborators, and their signatures are writ everywhere: here, the lacuna of a vandal's edit; there, the soft strokes of time's brush.

Precious stone was dragged from the reaches of the dreaming earth, stacked in cyclopean designs, and carved to the splendor of a thousand blooming florets. Moistureless air preserves the gilding, but time has softed its edges.

Drapery flows are frozen in marble around a rondure in high relief. The gilded walls of imperium are baroque, but they're still more modest than the gilding of the earlier sultans.

Stone quarried from the early earth binds the art of a life.

Stone quarried from the early earth divides the art of a life.

Black marble quarried from the early earth binds the art of a life.

Black marble quarried from the early earth divides the art of a life.

Black marble was rasped into a vaulted canvas of emptiness, and then left, inspiring wonder at what could have been.

A moist tissue lining stretches over electrofired clay and soldered metal plates. Underneath a translucent film, grids of undercircuitry blink their golden light.

A voluminous storage cabinet is worked into the geologic rib cage. Magnet-suspended shelves divide the space.

A voluminous storage cabinet is worked into the metallic rib cage. Magnet-suspended shelves divide the space.

Mountainous streamers of oily shellac are moulded to floor contours and trace a star orchid path. The whole section is glazed with dried death sludge.

Mountainous streamers of oily shellac are moulded to floor contours and trace a star orchid path. The whole section is glazed with furcate nerves.

Mountainous streamers of oily shellac are moulded to floor contours and trace a star orchid path. The whole section is glazed with solidified star gas.

Mountainous streamers of oily shellac are moulded to floor contours and trace a star orchid path. The whole section is glazed at right angles with solidified dream gas.

Mountainous streamers of oily shellac are moulded to floor contours and trace a star orchid path. The whole section is glazed with shale chips and dust.

Sloping streamers of oily shellac are moulded to floor contours and trace a star orchid path. The whole section is glazed with shale chips and dust.

Irregular volumes of stone are heaped together. Across its surface, points of order poke sporadically through the pile of entropy: a statue's finger, the gnomon of a sundial, a parcel of circuitboard.

It's a secretion of sticky palm-juice that has cooled into a big block.

A quantum mess cooled and arranged itself as a towering hexagon. Bubbles of earth gas and other quirks of time are frozen in the quartz-amber, and existence is chipped off the lathe of nothingness by moonlight.

Moss hems the little moonlit faces of speed-grown quartz. When entropy obliterates order, it reassembles at smaller scales.

Quartzstuff in the radial habit crusts over a layer of softstone, and beneath that, a layer of dead crystal dripping in static resin and singing with psychic promise.

Little crystal shoots were crushed by pure ego-weight to a girthful, stout, and equant tranducer of transient thoughtsoft. Decohered emotion and memory crystallize as they shoot up the root.

The shining surface of quickchrome swims in shifting refraction patterns. As its light is focused, glyphs begin to appear.

Magnetic tape is spooled around a wheel and fed to a drive head that scribes and scries, stamping data out of the third dimension then quickening it back in.

Across a field of brass and chrome diodes blink in gyres.

Scanlines paint the lune in cathode amber.

Springfoam keys push back against fingers in the course of flirtatious coupling between machine and folk.

Light glints off the tiny scratches torn into the vast tube's chrome surface from where metal smashed bone into grated submission.

Long ago the rivers themselves were ravenous, and they feasted on shale and limestone before taking bloated respite in the Great Salt Sea. Now the fissure-wounds have rotted to crimson and salt.

The ivory sea's dunes are like waves frozen in place. There are cracks in the salt from where the earth, blistered by the jeweled sun, contracted and broke. The horizon melts the sky together with the vast plain of Moghra'yi, the Great Salt Desert.

Prismatic filament colonizes the cracks between the salted rot. There are meadows here, She says.

Braids of roots and ribbons of fronds dimensionalize the flat loam. Something's home a discarded leaf makes.

Thriving florae pack the loam with maze-dense roots, and a high-wreath canopy chokes off the last beams of light.

Spores dance in eddies across kaleidoscopic fungal bonnets. Rivers of primordial soup, cast in the light of lava, gurgle a quickening melody.

Hex prisms burst out of black marble beds, and their edges decohere as warm static dew. The Stair purrs at low frequency.

Blips in the wave graph of stone over time.

In the wave graph of stone over time, where the world plates once vexed themselves into war, a quiet peace has settled.

The grove's million laced fingers sway in gentle opulence. Verdant fronds nestle the base of the Spindle from its mountainous nook.

Water

Svy urges over the salt-capped peaks and spills into the vine-braided loam. Her banks are shaded by the chrome carcasses of giants.

The Spindle scintillates in watery effigy on her surface. She ferries crushed granite through a mountain pass and into her leafy firth.

The umbrage of the boughs wrings the warmth from Opal's waters and leave behind a shady pool.

Yonth breaks the massif to the strange East and ushers its nameless waters into Qud. Fish-things feed on her basalt chips.

Old alps opened in the ageless past fill with a cool brine.

Coral fingers poke out from the spongebed and pierce the algal bloom, where white esh flock in the hundreds.

An arcology of bright polyps arches across the soldered trellis of old, and a rich diversity of life peoples it.

Here crumble the mysterious Eaters' vine-swathed works, spun on the cyclopean lathe in an ageless past. Chrome steeples and parapets that rise above the clutches of shale hint at the labyrinths beneath them.

Rampant greenspread canopies a starburst of the Eaters' richest works. The jungle is torn at the corners, where crysteel balustrades and star orchid lancets peek through.

Ants in the viridian chaff, the farmers sap the last drops of pristine moisture out of the salt-spangled earth.

Here lies the hallowed ground where the Spindle, a lengthless needle of maya blue, ruptures the tomb-dressed earth and pierces the firmament.

Through the umbrage of choking trees fly the hundred archways and buttresses of funerary monuments. They peer over marble arcades that roof the catacombs of the Eaters of earth.

Here is the jungle village of ape god worshippers and their giant mushroom dwellings.

A naturally reddened outcropping of stone juts out of the salted crag.

The Six Day Stilt rises from the dunes like a petrified kraken corpse, bearing down upon the vacant flats.

Eyn Rogel

Still erect is the superior half of the colossal gate inscribed with the runes of a hundred indecipherable tongues. Beneath its chrome palings a wide passage opens into the jungle loam.

Red qudzu vines take as their trellises chrome wells bored into the earth.

Shrouded in the rotting jungle are the mouths of the rust-caves of Golgotha, chrome's graveyard.

Eons-shifted stone entombs the angleless architecture of Bethsaida's lair.

Rubble encases this abandoned mine where ancient tribes siphoned the black blood for their own inscrutable purposes.

An arc of rust paints the sky and circles the path once taken by gargantuans in chrome.

Tucked into a marble glade is the cloven trunk of Chavvah, the Tree of Life. Its fallen leaves lay like a mirrored carpet, and the dream wrens chirr a psychal carol.

Dyed pipework topology mounted in the spongebed is a lodestar to the lyrical community.

Light peaks through its wet leaves in scattershot, and its roots look like a wax colonnade melted into a maze and resolidified.

Fruited hands climb the stalks of the grifter tree. When the light catches on the surface of the exposed corm, Spindle glitter throws it back to the widened grove.

A tangled nest of roots spill through the earth. The bark is splintered into pointy spines. The leaves are greasy and stinking.

A tangled nest of roots spill through the earth. The bark is splintered into pointy spines.

A particularly prickly peano patch.

Starapples hang from ashen branches, motes of luscious, red light in a bleached tableau.

Golden fronds unfurl when the desert wind moistens. Pieces of bark, collated into tiny intersecting rings, have been chewed off by wood grazers.

Skin peels on the tuber belly as it hums with grounding bass, and the shoots throb in upsetting staccato.

Bright florets explode from a central disc of darker, spiraling florets. Together they're like a tiny sun.

A hut's girth of bug-gnawed bark shoots up into ethereal sky and splays into a crown of foliage.

Insects circle and buzz around a quartet of golden brown petals that droop over their thickling stalk. When something touches it, the floret lashes up in a dreamful rage.

Coral petals sprout from the top of a flimsy stem. A metal or bone hoof has crushed its siblings and spread their acid fibers across the soil.

Salt gathers in its furrows. It's knotted with moisture-swollen wafers in place of leaves.

Salt gathers in its furrows. It's knotted with moisture-swollen wafers in place of leaves, and it appears to be half-eaten.

Girthy pilings of fibrous salt-rot stake out these pools of brine. They belong to no one.

A nebula of spaded leaves swish with dry creek and beetle munch.

The trunk column corkscrews on the radial path of light and blossoms a crown of victory laurel.

Sun-sated fronds sag against a bug-scarred trunk in the shape of a melted star.

The strands glisten with a frothing film.

It's achromous and brittle; it crunches under the foot. How it clusters into mats must conform to the shape of life-wet body-banks it once flowered from, and with dark red blood will again.

Ghost-canes are twirled to pictorial stillness, and moisture gathers on their buds.

Puffy halos of acid and myrtle green leaves gird the length of a sky-toward wood minaret. The peak breaks out the canopy to win the sun-drinking game.

Moss-slick shoots coil at the crown of a slouching trunk like the she-medusa. Air musses them into more disarray.

Through the nether of a vaulted root-trellis, leaves point at perfect angles to sift sunlight and bathe ur-buds in soft gold warmth.

Bright sequin leaves shimmer in indigo constellations, and branches fork through the entropy fungus.

Bent roots chunnel upward to a canopy of fuzz. The eye tries to draw a boundary around single leaves, but their light lines sputter and lose their derivatives.

Waxen sprigs sag to the weight of the algebraic tubers. Each one is perfect and regular, its faces matte with sheenless platonic dew.

Real potential surfs the rhizome on choppy waves and quantizes into woody blades of grass.

Bubbles of green stipules are arrayed in rings of quickening lattice growth. The pace is sorcerous; the earnest and everforward will of the plantworld is captured here at a millionfold.

Its aspect imbued with lucent coral, this mushroom catches your eye like no other. Qud knows no such hue, and so you ask yourself: what sort of radiant rain dyed its flesh? Could it be an iota of the Eaters themselves, mummified in the soil of the Rainbow Wood?

Shining hyphae pour their soft light up into the orbicular cap of the earthlamp.

Its stalk is trunk-fat, and powder coats the spots on its humongous cap. The pigment of its skin is liquid dye from a nearby weep.

Nature bequeathed a dandy cap to the slender, bowed stalk and gills that pucker on its underside. The pigment of its skin is liquid dye from a nearby weep.

Fairy rings of braided grass-coral-fungi hybrids poke along their shadow network and excrete replicated struts as sheathing.

Stuck to the feelers of a polyp cluster and beetling from a corroded strut is a swollen lump of film. A bright broth of carbon-melted platinum goo burns inside.

Feelers sway in a circlet on a skeletal vase-column. The aboral side is yoked to other polyps, forming a fossilized arcology.

Bow polyps colonize the cylindrical topology of the lattice and pattern out an orthogonal neighborhood in a network of life.

Soft-body beings excrete the calcified walls of their arcologies as air-climbing spires. They have stone texture and house microlife in their cavities.

Cry-packed casing freckles on cyclinders joined at right angles. Shine from the softer metal pokes through, silvery-white palladium that once performed hydro- and electroconduction across a vast arcological lattice.

Porous skeletons of spongin poke the inverted tunnel buttes, stone-like, out to angles.

It's laminated jelly molded as a globoid with pores to filter and nosh algae, and it jiggles.

Stalactitic prisms stutter-hum the compressed thoughtstuff of trillions across the psychic sea.

Microcolumns of incandescent crystal are bundled in dense posies, and branch through the sky as magnificent fractals. They toss moonlight back and forth between them.

Drops of static dew fuzz the sharp crystal edges. The flats themselves are radiant and rustle on a psychic breeze. In gestalt, they flow like reversible sequins across the mind/body divide.

Its corners were waxed off by static and its crystal corms burn with tranduced moonlight. It chimes in near and far keys.

Hexagon fibers of delicate crystal twine through the earth and push the ambient psychal glow up the phloem to the sapient chimes.

Hexagon fibers of delicate, newly shedded crystal twine through the earth and vibrate with pre-psychal fullness. They radiate an early glow.

Heartroots tangle at the yawning psychal nexus of the crystal tree. They burn with the light of gaseous feelstuff, all the bits of ambient order in the soil and rock animated by a deeper dimensional warping. This is a shore on the psychic sea.

A squadron of flowstone limbs grip the cave floor, and a banded trunk of calcite pokes the rotting air. Its twirling apex is wrapped in bone-made-vapor.

Coral bricks tesselate the path toward an otherplace.

Black marble rectangles tesselate the path.

Brick rectangles tesselate the path.

Metal rectangles tesselate the path.

Marble rectangles tesselate the path.

Grey marble rectangles tesselate the path.

A bridge made of dried brinestalk.

Dappled marble rectangles are stepping stones in and out of the pit.

Glistening silk was spun to a capture spiral and mounted on a series of bridge threads.

Glistening silk was spun to a capture spiral and mounted on a series of bridge threads. Hoarfrost fractals texture the strands outside the 2D plane.

Glistening silk was spun to a capture spiral and mounted on a series of bridge threads. The filament vibrates across dimensions in the manifold.

Dust blooms on the ascending stair.

Light ebbs off the descending stair.

Machinic tones are made soft against the slime-wet walls of a darkling shaft. A void is beneath.

Darkness floods up from the empty space.

Space is emptied of solid impediments.

A freightless tether slings down a dark and vast channel.

Darkness floods up the polyp-strewn fringes of an open pit.

A cleft in the red stone opens to a waterspray of underearth.

Smooth and cloudy frustums hover in a helix of psionic suspension.

Antennae splay from their broad stannic face at just the right angle to form the 'love frustum' -- a shape phenomenologically proven to arouse the spirit into filling the body -- and their expression is an atlas of grooves that reads as dumb desire.

His chassis is illuminated with the artifacts of life: dirt smeared over his undercarriage, dead leaves pinned by bolts to his hardpoints, lichen angling for sunlight on his armatures. A hat crumpled like cheese cloth shades the glass lune of his sensor array, where with a dim but golden iris he sees, and muses.

It's you, but the shadows on your face are cast by a different sun and spire. Your weal, your woe, the totality of your actions: you've a new context for them now. Where you reach to the branch of a fruiting tree for a starapple, either likewise reaches, but what do they pull back? The answer is obscured by the umbra of a thousand timelines.

It's you, but the hue of your eyes shines by a different moon and lamp. Your judgements, your choices... were they yours at all? Where or reaches for a silhouetted space, you reach for the starapple of a fruiting tree. Your movement must be the source, you must be the agent. Yet you swear it was or who moved first.

Spiral-grained wood was coopered into the Sublime Angle by a secret carver in three places: the headrest and two rockers. A small inscription on the oblong splat avers the wood was stolen from an emir's palace grove in the Hanging Hills and smuggled across the Homs Delta. There, this mysterious stranger worked a simple beauty out of the wood. But what other workbench sorcery was performed? The chair rocks of its own accord, and its tight friction squeals are a bride language to those who listen.

Soft, down glowcrow feathers were stuffed into a knit sheet.

Though bipedal and clad in robe and sandal, this is no Urshiib. With no quills or technical expertise to speak of, this ursine companion's talents lie in his inexplicable force of ego. Power shines behind his eyes, albeit in the absence of substantial intellect.

Shuffling along on countless little fronds like a smarmy caterpillar, this vine sidles along xyr way, eternally seeking a worthy audience for xyr slippery wit.

This long, sharp frond has been adapted to take over where diplomacy leaves off.

Two wide eyes open like bright-shored lochs of a different realm. The mere act of looking traps your own eye in their currents, and you're dragged through a procession of spectral forms and drowned in their black waters before rising to the surface of your familiar, buoyant world. Now the smooth and feathered bird is visible to you, lit from behind by a distant gleam. As they flap the shadows off their wings, they appear to take on the shape of something else.

The wilds have matted his layers of softest snow fur into a heath-brushed tundra. A wide snout he bears for scooping out the rain-damp loam, and a staunch tail for vigorous wagging. He pants and eeps in awakened appreciation of a companion worth a damn.

Under a coat of curly fur, dappled skin dents -- dodecagons -- catch the filtered brightness of the wide world and thrash it back against itself twelve times, and then breathe out a soft glow. It lights the beards of the three thin necks, each craning a head to inspect the others and acting as a lever for its set of hooking horns. The god-goat is mute and severe.

Damp pistachio skin heaves around his tiny nares like miniature foothills caught in flood. He's perched on his twiggy shanks comfortably, and his star-bright eyes watch the wide world. The floor about him is wet with the inky prints of webbed feet; the dotted baby has erupted out of the realm of the imaginary.

Though nearly extinct now, for a few short decades the pit beetle was a must-have accessory for any bandit fort or murder cave. Sporting a pair of articulated horns, a determined pit beetle excels at its favorite activity: peeling away armor and feasting on the contents. As violently loyal as she is affectionate, Man Opener is a paragon of her kind. She wanders Qud in search of a new keeper, or at least a friend.

Little hooves pat the ground in practiced fury, and three little horns arch toward the sky in menacing miniature. Into the slate-scale skin of his diminutive body is a labyrinth of scar-etched filigree, and while it looks as though it could be the work of a meticulous gemcutter, in fact it's the aftermath of a hundred skirmishes and a gratuitous reduction in size. There, the tiny spirals that were incised by the puma's claw just before it was gored and dashed against the trunk of a diacalyptus tree. There, the miniscule triangle of a warden's pike, who was flattened into a bloody mess and fed to worms. A fate-wrench took Uthabatafah's beastly dominion from him, but might it have gifted him something in return? Through the feckless fury, how might being in the world on a new scale bind him to others in ways he couldn't have imagined before?

On the night of a full moon, a gladiator found a babe with a dominant breastplate in each hand outside his arena. He and his fellow gladiators adopted the babe and named him Yarad.

Deep in the wilds of Pond District Maarramish, Yarad stumbled upon a clan of highly entropic beings performing a secret ritual. Because of his reputation for murdering someone by slaughtering her entire clan, they furiously rebuked him and declared him a villain to their kind.

While leading a small army in Pond District Maarramish, Yarad challenged the legitimacy of the sultan of Qud over an ordinance prohibiting the practice of smashing things to bits. He won and took the reins of power. He was twenty-seven years old.

In 5659 BR, Yarad won a decisive victory against the combined forces of Pond District Maarramish at the bloody Battle of Darqulep. As a result of the battle, Darqulep was so rife with smashed rubble that it was renamed the Commanding Void.

In 5647 BR, Yarad won a decisive victory against the combined forces of Pond District Maarramish at the bloody Battle of Talep. As a result of the battle, Talep was so rife with smashed rubble that it was renamed the Dominant Moor.

In 5636 BR, Yarad was challenged by a pretender to a duel over an ordinance mandating the practice of hearing the lamentations of one's foes. He won and had the claimant murdered. He was forty-five years old.

At midnight under a strange and turquoise sky, the people of Mavah saw an image on the horizon that looked like a hammer bathed in turquoise. It was Yarad, and after he came and left Mavah, the people built a monument to him, and thenceforth called him Hammer-in-Turquoise.

In 5615 BR, Yarad won a decisive victory against the combined forces of Pond District Maarramish at the bloody Battle of Alaggappur. As a result of the battle, Alaggappur was so rife with smashed rubble that it was renamed the Mighty Flats.

At the Battle of Imas Cave, Yarad fought as a mercenary sultan to liberate flowers. He wielded a dominant dagger with such finesse that it became forever known as The Dominant Prize Flowersboon.

In 5598 BR, Yarad rampaged through all of Ilep, particularly rejoicing in the lamentations of water barons and arachnids. He became known as the Ilep Sorrow.

In 5597 BR, Yarad, Hammer-in-Turquoise, the Ilep Sorrow, died of natural causes. He was 94 years old.

At daybreak on the first day of summer, a babe was found swaddled with meteorites on its eyes by a group of highly entropic beings in Barracks District Temrir. They took her into their fold and fostered her, and she became known as Yarad II, Shining Progeny of Highly Entropic Beings.

Deep in the wilds of Barracks District Temrir, Yarad II stumbled upon a clan of baboons performing a secret ritual. Because of her shining visage, they furiously rebuked her and declared her a villain to their kind.

On an expedition around Barracks District Temrir, Yarad II was captured by bandits. She murdered their leader by forecasting his doom, and was thenceforth known as Telescopebroker.

In 5404 BR, Yarad II won a decisive victory against the combined forces of Barracks District Temrir at the bloody Battle of Ikish. As a result of the battle, Ikish was so devastated by smoldering stardust that it was renamed White-Hotbadland.

In 5401 BR, Yarad II won a decisive victory against the combined forces of Barracks District Temrir at the bloody Battle of Haarrashur Mesh. As a result of the battle, Haarrashur Mesh was so devastated by smoldering stardust that it was renamed the White-Hot Wreck.

Late in 5384 BR, after murdering a popular rival with a dagger made of sand, the sultan of Qud abdicated the throne. Because of Yarad II's white-hot visage, she was chosen as the successor.

As she rode around Barracks District Temrir, Yarad II's chariot was driven off a cliff by a trickster party of baboons. She was killed at 63 years old.

In 5372 BR, it was discovered that Yarad II had faked her death with the clever use of a lifelike hologram. Despite reports to the contrary, Yarad II was alive and well. She was known thenceforth as the Gleaming Ghost of Barracks District Temrir.

Deep in Barracks District Temrir, Yarad II discovered Uppa Den. There she befriended insects and painted pictures of beasts and monsters with flaming suns.

While traveling alone in Barracks District Temrir, Yarad II had a dream that she was water fasting. From that day forth, she was obsessed with brine.

While traveling through Forum District Sakh, Yarad II stopped at a market in Dappa. At an obscure shop, she purchased a desiccated floating orb and named it Desiccatedeca Yaradfriend. Then she went to a nearby tavern and lost Desiccatedeca Yaradfriend to a local thief. She cursed the tavern and left Dappa.

While traveling through Shrine District Tunna, Yarad II stopped at a market in Uvuh Grotto. At an obscure shop, she purchased a luminous breastplate and named it Luminous Yaradfriend. Then she went to a nearby tavern and lost Luminous Yaradfriend in a game of dice. She cursed the tavern and left Uvuh Grotto.

In 5336 BR, Yarad II, Shining Progeny of Highly Entropic Beings, Telescopebroker, the Gleaming Ghost of Barracks District Temrir, died of natural causes. She was 102 years old.

One auspicious day, a historian found a babe with miniature clocks on its eyes outside her college. She and her fellow historians adopted the babe and named him Darileshir.

In 4660 BR, Darileshir won a decisive victory against the combined forces of Prison District Suarrappir at the bloody Battle of Old Urcher. As a result of the battle, Old Urcher was so rife with stray portals to other places and times that it was renamed Periodicflats.

While traveling through Forum District Sakh, Darileshir stopped at a market in Dappa. At an obscure shop, he purchased an orbital pistol and named it Orbital Mother Darileshirboon. Then he went to a nearby tavern and lost Orbital Mother Darileshirboon in a foolhardy bet. He cursed the tavern and left Dappa.

At the Battle of Shemrod Tangle, Darileshir fought as a mercenary to liberate robots. He wielded a periodic dagger with such prowess that it became forever known as Periodicoca Robotsfriend.

While wandering around Forum District Sakh, Darileshir discovered Old Awan. There he befriended insects and penned a historical account.

In a cathedral ornamented with forgotten seconds of one's life, Darileshir cemented his friendship with nomads by marrying Tamish.

Deep in the wilds of Forum District Sakh, Darileshir discovered Alanip Dune. There he befriended fungi and found a new home.

Throughout 4592 BR, Darileshir pillaged all of Ilep, conducting midnight raids on the villages of apes and equines. He became known as the Terror of Ilep.

At noon under an uncanny and citrine sky, the people of the Hamlet of Kiazovah saw an image on the horizon that looked like a hourglass bathed in citrine. It was Darileshir, and after he came and left the Hamlet of Kiazovah, the people built a monument to him, and thenceforth called him Hourglass-in-Citrine.

In 4573 BR, after a bout of existential despair, the sultan of Qud was assassinated. Because Darileshir demanded it, he was chosen as the successor.

While wandering around Karchebal, Darileshir discovered Mibymmu. There he befriended baboons and penned a historical account.

In 4559 BR, Darileshir won a decisive victory against the combined forces of Prison District Supad at the bloody Battle of Bimrikh, though he lost his prized Periodicoca Robotsfriend during the course of the conflict. As a result of the battle, Bimrikh was so rife with stray portals to other places and times that it was renamed the Orbital Badland.

In 4558 BR, Darileshir, Partner to Tamish, the Terror of Ilep, Hourglass-in-Citrine, died of natural causes. He was 112 years old.

One auspicious day, a stargazer found a babe with blocks of ice on its eyes outside his prayer yurt. He and his fellow stargazers adopted the babe and named him Djaraseh.

At a remote prayer yurt, Djaraseh awakened an allegory that evoked the presence of an icy block of ice. He named it The Promise of Ice.

Somewhere in Atara, Djaraseh saw his own reflection in a river. For the rest of Djaraseh's life, he always kept some mirrors hidden on his person.

At dawn under a marvelous and burgundy sky, the people of Temas Grotto saw an image on the horizon that looked like a prism bathed in burgundy. It was Djaraseh, and after he came and left Temas Grotto, the people built a monument to him, and thenceforth called him Prism-in-Burgundy.

While traveling through Ilep, Djaraseh stopped at a tavern in Iazotara. There he lost his prized the Promise of Ice to a local pickpocket. He cursed the tavern and left Iazotara.

In 3616 BR, Djaraseh wreaked havoc on all of Prison District Supad, stealing oil from the heat lamps in the villages of oozes and flowers. He became known as the Supad Scourge.

While stark naked in freezing temperatures, Djaraseh cemented his friendship with gladiators by marrying Tervatum.

Near the location of Shawar, Djaraseh was captured by bandits. He murdered their leader with a dagger made of sand, and was thenceforth known as Mirrorwaker.

In a hall of mirrors, Djaraseh cemented his friendship with geologists by marrying Shamrod.

Early in 3578 BR, after murdering a popular rival with a helmet made of iron, the sultan of Qud was assassinated. Because Djaraseh demanded it, he was chosen as the successor.

Deep in Alabymas, Djaraseh stumbled upon a clan of robots performing a secret ritual. Because of his mirrored eyes, they furiously rebuked him and declared him a villain to their kind.

In 3572 BR, Djaraseh, Prism-in-Burgundy, the Supad Scourge, Tervatum's Husband, Mirrorwaker, Husband of Shamrod, died of natural causes. He was 98 years old.

One starry evening, a babe was found swaddled on a floating platform of polished chrome with its mouth full of sand. That babe came to be known as Djaxerpur.

In 2023 BR, a corrupt administrator was appointed minister of Kirsitara. She outlawed the practice of glassblowing, and Djaxerpur was forced to flee.

While traveling near Marchemor in Atara, Djaxerpur was captured by bandits. She murdered their leader by trapping her in a prism, and was thenceforth known as Mirrordancer.

At a remote workshop, Djaxerpur met with a group of tinkers and commissioned an artifact that evoked the presence of a stained mirror. She named it Lure of Mirror.

Deep in Atara, Djaxerpur stumbled upon a clan of winged mammals performing a secret ritual. Because of her mirrored eyes, they accepted her into their fold and taught her their secrets.

While traveling near Marchemor in Atara, Djaxerpur was captured by bandits. She murdered their leader with a dagger made of glass, and was thenceforth known as Prismshouter.

At dusk under an uncanny and magnolia sky, the people of Mammu Dune saw an image on the horizon that looked like a mirror bathed in magnolia. It was Djaxerpur, and after she came and left Mammu Dune, the people built a monument to her, and thenceforth called her Mirror-in-Magnolia.

In 1981 BR, a corrupt administrator was appointed minister of Atara. She outlawed association with winged mammals, and Djaxerpur was forced to flee.

While wandering around Channel District Sukesh, Djaxerpur stumbled upon a clan of antelopes performing a secret ritual. Because of her mirrored eyes, they accepted her into their fold and taught her their secrets.

In early 1972 BR, Djaxerpur challenged the sultan of Qud to a duel over an ordinance prohibiting the practice of staring into mirrors. She won and ascended to the throne. She was sixty-six years old.

While wandering around Tawar, Djaxerpur discovered Ekapad. There she befriended cannibals and stained a glass window.

In 1965 BR, Djaxerpur, Mirrordancer, Prismshouter, Mirror-in-Magnolia, died of natural causes. She was 73 years old.

One starry evening, a babe was found swaddled with its mouth full of circuits by a group of baetyls in Red Rock. They took him into their fold and fostered him, and he became known as Resheph, the Coiled Lamb of Baetyls.

While traveling alone through the Rust Wells, Resheph came across a trove of gleaming stars in a bottle. From that day forth, he always kept some stardust on his person.

While traveling near Bethesda Susa, Resheph lost control of his chariot and drove it off a cliff. Luckily, a local physician named Rebekah came to his rescue. Moved by her kindness, Resheph enrolled at a nearby hospice as her apprentice.

Acting against a prohibition on the practice of worshipping the stars, Resheph led an army to the gates of Omonporch. There he defeated his brothers in battle and liberated its citizens, and they crowned him the sultan of Qud.

In 99 BR, Resheph appointed Rebekah administrator of Ilep. She tendered alms for the sick in his name.

After conferring with mysterious strangers, Resheph convinced them to help him found a harborage for the purpose of receiving visitors from across the clustered cosmos. They named it Starfarer's Quay.

In 3 BR, the Gyre widened, and the first triad of plagues afflicted the land. The water was poisoned with salt, girshlings ravaged the fruit and wheat, and tongues rotted away in the mouths of kith and kin. Resheph walked below the chrome arches and healed the sick.

In 3 BR, Rebekah betrayed Resheph by stealing the Mark of Death from the gate to the Tomb of the Eaters. In punishment, Resheph excommunicated her from the sultanate.

In 2 BR, the Gyre widened, and the second triad of plagues afflicted the land. The legs of kith and kin annealed to iron, darkness bloomed from the earth, and the svardym blackened the sky. Resheph walked below the chrome arches and healed the sick.

At Starfarer's Quay, Resheph consulted with mysterious strangers and learned the secret of the Gyre. By cause of the misdeeds of the elder saads and sultans, star beings had levied a curse on Qud. Resheph vowed to make right from this wrong and redeem our doomed world.

In 1 BR, the Gyre widened, and the final plague afflicted the land. The Girsh Nephilim rose from their cradles on the Moon Stair and slouched toward Qud to eat its young. Resheph rose to meet them in battle and cast them back.

In 1 AR, Resheph closed the gates to the Tomb of the Eaters, abdicated the throne, and dissolved the sultanate in order to lift the curse of the Gyre.

In 2 AR, Rebekah died of glotrot, and on her deathbed Resheph forgave her and absolved her of sin. He allowed her to be buried in the village of Ezra, outside the gate to the Tomb of the Eaters and beneath the shadow of the Spindle.

In 3 AR, Resheph cleansed the marshlands of the plagues of the Gyre and taught Abram to sow watervine along its fertile tracks.

At twilight in the shadow of the Spindle, the people of Omonporch saw an image on the horizon that looked like a ghost bathed in cerulean. It was Resheph, and after he came and left Omonporch, the people built a monument to him, and thenceforth called him Ghost-in-Cerulean.

In 6 AR, Resheph, the Above, Ghost-in-Cerulean, the Coiled Lamb of Baetyls, died of natural causes. He was 216 years old.

